Chapter One
CONSTITUTION:
?
WHY AND HOW
I
NTRODUCTION
This book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters that
follow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of our
Constitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government in
our country and their relationship with each other.
But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidents
and prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the
government and the various principles that bind the institutions of government
have their origin in the Constitution of India.
After studying this chapter, you will learn:
± what a constitution means;
± what a constitution does to the society;
± how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and
± what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made.

W D W N C ?
HY O E EED A ONSTITUTION
What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does it
perform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily
existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you might
think.
Constitution allows coordination and
assurance
Imagine yourself to be a member of a
reasonably large group. Further imagine that
this group has the following characteristics.
The members of this group are diverse in
various ways. They have different religious
allegiances: some are Hindus, some are
Muslims, some Christians and some perhaps
profess no religion at all. They are also varied
in many different respects: they
pursue different professions, have
different abilities, have different
hobbies, different tastes in
everything from films to books. This group is very much like the
Some are rich and some are poor. people of my village.
Some are old, some young.
Imagine further that members of this group are likely to
have disputes over various aspects of life: How much
property should one be allowed to own? Should it be
compulsory that every child be sent to school or should
the parents be allowed to decide? How much should this
Yes, this could be my colony as
group spend on its safety and security? Or should it build
well! Does this apply to your
more parks instead? Should the group be allowed to
village or town or colony too?
discriminate against some of its members? Every question
will elicit a variety of answers from different people. But,
for all their diversity, this group has to live together. They are
dependent upon each other in various ways. They require the
cooperation of each other. What will enable the group to live together
peacefully?

One may say that perhaps members of this group can live together
if they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certain 3
basic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of some
basic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because they
would not know what members of this group could do to each other,
who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basic
rules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members of
that group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these
rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable. If
citizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, they
will themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the
rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that
others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished.
The first function of a constitution is to provide a set of
basic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst
members of a society.
Activity
Enact the thought experiment of this section in the
classroom. The entire class should discuss and arrive
at some decisions that would apply to everyone for
this entire session. The decision could be about:
– How would the class representatives be chosen?
– Which decisions will the representative be able to
take on behalf of the entire class?
– Are there some decisions that the class
representative cannot take without consulting the
entire class?
– You can add any other items to this list (collection
of common kitty for the class, organisation of picnic
and trips, sharing of common resources, …) as long
as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you
include those subjects that have led to any
differences in the past.
– How to revise these decisions in case you
need to?

– Write down all these decisions on a paper and put
it up on the notice board. Which problems did you
encounter in this decision? Were there differences
among different students? How did you resolve
these differences? Did the entire class gain
something from this exercise?
Specification of decision making powers
A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to which
a state is constituted or governed. But what should these
fundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well,
the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what
the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, but
others may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferences
should govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to
live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best.
How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what
rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to
decide?
The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. It
specifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who
gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who
gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchical
constitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the old
Soviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in
democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide.
But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that the
people should decide, it will not answer the question: how should
the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agree
to it? Should the people directly vote on each matter as the ancient
Greeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing
representatives? But if the people act through their representatives,
how should these representatives be elected? How many should there
be?
4 In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in most
instances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that
Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Before
identifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify

| R C
EAD A ARTOON |  |
| --- | --- |



who has the authority to enact it. If Parliament has the authority to
enact laws, there must be a law that bestows this authority on 5
Parliament in the first
place. This is the function
of the constitution. It is an
authority that constitutes
government in the first
place.
The second function
of a constitution is to
specify who has the
power to make
decisions in a society.
It decides how the
government will be
constituted.
Limitations on the
powers of government
But this is clearly not
enough. Suppose you
decided who had the
authority to make
decisions. But then this
authority passed laws that
you thought were patently
unfair. It prohibited you
from practising your
religion for instance. Or it
enjoined that clothes of a
certain colour were
prohibited, or that you
were not free to sing certain songs or that people who belonged to a
particular group (caste or religion) would always have to serve others
and would not be allowed to retain any property. Or that government
could arbitrarily arrest someone, or that only people of a certain skin
colour would be allowed to draw water from wells. You would obviously
think these laws were unjust and unfair. And even though they were
passed by a government that had come into existence based
.snootraC
elgaC
thgirypoC
40PES12
,enubirT
dlareH
lanoitanretnI
,etappahC
kcirtaP
yb
”noitutitsnoC
naeporuE“
R C
EAD A ARTOON
Countries of the European Union tried to create a
European constitution. The attempt failed. Here is a
cartoonist’s impression of this attempt. Does this
always happen in any constitution making?

on certain procedures there would be something
obviously unjust about that government enacting these
laws.
So the third function of a constitution is to set
some limits on what a government can impose on
its citizens. These limits are fundamental in the
sense that government may never trespass them.
Constitutions limit the power of government in many
ways. The most common way of limiting the power of
government is to specify certain fundamental rights that
all of us possess as citizens and which no government
can ever be allowed to violate. The exact content and
interpretation of these rights varies from constitution to
Ah! So you first create a monster constitution. But most constitutions will protect a basic
and then start worrying about cluster of rights. Citizens will be protected from being
saving yourself from it! I would arrested arbitrarily and for no reason. This is one basic
say, why create this monster called limitation upon the power of government. Citizens will
government in the first place? normally have the right to some basic liberties: to freedom
of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association,
freedom to conduct a trade or business etc. In practice,
these rights can be limited during times of national
emergency and the constitution specifies the
circumstances under which these rights may be
withdrawn.
Aspirations and goals of a society
Most of the older constitutions limited themselves largely
to allocating decision-making power and setting some
limits to government power. But many twentieth century
constitutions, of which the Indian Constitution is the
finest example, also provide an enabling framework for
the government to do certain positive things, to express
the aspirations and goals of society. The Indian
Constitution was particularly innovative in this respect.
Societies with deep entrenched inequalities of various
6 kinds, will not only have to set limits on the power of
government, they will also have to enable and empower
the government to take positive measures to overcome
forms of inequality or deprivation.

| R C
EAD A ARTOON
4 December 1949 |
| --- |
| The constitution makers have to address themselves to very different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this balancing act? |



For example, India aspires to be a society that is free of caste
discrimination. If this is our society’s aspiration, the government will 7
have to be enabled or empowered to take all the necessary steps to
achieve this goal. In a country like South Africa, which had a deep
history of racial discrimination, its new constitution had to enable
the government to end racial discrimination. More positively, a
constitution may enshrine the aspirations of a society. The framers
of the Indian Constitution, for example, thought that each
individual in society should have all that is necessary for them to
lead a life of minimal dignity and social self-respect — minimum
material well-being, education etc. The Indian Constitution
enables the government to take positive welfare measures
some of which are legally enforceable. As we go on studying
the Indian Constitution, we shall find that such enabling
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
R C
EAD A ARTOON
4 December 1949
The constitution makers have to address themselves to very
different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between
different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these
different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this
balancing act?

provisions have the support of the Preamble to our
Constitution, and these provisions are found in the section
on Fundamental Rights. The Directive Principles of State
of Policy also enjoin government to fulfil certain
aspirations of the people.
The fourth function of a constitution is to enable
the government to fulfil the aspirations of a society
and create conditions for a just society.
Enabling provisions of the Constitution
What does it take to write nice Constitutions are not only rules and regulations
things in the constitution? controlling the powers of the government. They
What is the point in writing also give powers to the government for pursuing
down lofty aspirations and collective good of the society.
goals if they cannot change the – Constitution of South Africa assigns many
life of the people? responsibilities to the government: it wants
the government to take measures to promote
conservation of nature, make efforts to protect
persons or groups subjected to unfair
discrimination, and provides that the
government must progressively ensure
adequate housing to all, health care, etc.
– In the case of Indonesia also, the government
is enjoined to establish and conduct national
education system. The Indonesian Constitution
ensures that the poor and destitute children
will be looked after by the government.
Fundamental identity of a people
Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a
constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a
people.
This means the people as a collective entity come
into being only through the basic constitution. It is
8 by agreeing to a basic set of norms about how one
should be governed, and who should be governed that
one forms a collective identity. One has many sets
of identities that exist prior to a constitution. But by

| R C
EAD A ARTOON |  |
| --- | --- |
| The writing of the new Iraqi constitution the collapse of Saddam Hussain’s regime a lot of conflict between different et groups in the country. What do th different people stand for? Compare conflict depicted here with that depicte earlier cartoons for the European Union India. | after saw hnic ese the d in and |



agreeing to certain basic norms and principles one constitutes one’s
basic political identity. Second, constitutional norms are the overarching
framework within which one pursues individual aspirations, goals and
freedoms. The constitution sets authoritative constraints upon what one
may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that we may not
trespass. So the constitution also gives one a moral identity. Third and
finally, it may be the case that many basic political and moral values are
now shared across different constitutional traditions.
If one looks at constitutions around the world, they differ in many
respects — in the form of government they enjoin in many procedural
details. But they also share a
good deal. Most modern
R C
constitutions create a form of EAD A ARTOON
government that is democratic
in some respects, most claim
to protect certain basic rights.
But constitutions are different
in the way they embody
conceptions of national
identity. Most nations are an
amalgamation of a complex
set of historical traditions;
they weave together the
diverse groups that reside
within the nation in different
ways. For example, German
identity was constituted by
being ethnically German.
The constitution gave
The writing of the new Iraqi constitution after
expression to this identity.
the collapse of Saddam Hussain’s regime saw
The Indian Constitution, on
a lot of conflict between different ethnic
the other hand, does not groups in the country. What do these
make ethnic identity a different people stand for? Compare the
criterion for citizenship. conflict depicted here with that depicted in
Different nations embody earlier cartoons for the European Union and
India.
different conceptions of
what the relationship
.snootraC
elgaC
.thgirypoC
.50GUA81
,lanruoJ
euqreuqublA
,reverT
nhoJ
,”noitutitsnoC
iqarI“

| Indian Constitution at Work
between the different regions of a nation and the central government |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a country. Check your progress Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions. For each of these write the function that this provision performs. The government cannot Limitations on the order any citizen to follow power of the or not to follow any religion government The government must try to reduce inequalities in income and wealth The President has the power to appoint the Prime Minister The Constitution is the supreme law that everyone has to obey |  |  |  |
|  | The government cannot order any citizen to follow or not to follow any religion | Limitations on the power of the government |  |
|  | The government must try to reduce inequalities in income and wealth |  |  |
|  | The President has the power to appoint the Prime Minister |  |  |
|  | The Constitution is the supreme law that everyone has to obey |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  | Indian citizenship is not limited to people of |  |  |
|  | any race, caste or religion |  |  |



between the different regions of a nation and the central government
should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a
country.
Check your progress
Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions.
For each of these write the function that this provision
performs.
The government cannot Limitations on the
order any citizen to follow power of the
or not to follow any religion government
The government must try
to reduce inequalities
in income and wealth
The President has the
power to appoint
the Prime Minister
The Constitution is the
supreme law that everyone
has to obey
Indian citizenship is not
limited to people of
any race, caste or religion
T A C
HE UTHORITY OF A ONSTITUTION
We have outlined some of the functions a constitution performs. These
functions explain why most societies have a constitution. But there
are three further questions we can ask about constitutions:

a) What is a constitution?
b) How effective is a constitution? 11
c) Is a constitution just?
In most countries, ‘Constitution’ is a compact
document that comprises a number of articles about the
state, specifying how the state is to be constituted and
what norms it should follow. When we ask for the
constitution of a country we are usually referring to this
document. But some countries, the United Kingdom for
instance, do not have one single document that can be
called the Constitution. Rather they have a series of
documents and decisions that, taken collectively, are
referred to as the constitution. So, we can say that
constitution is the document or set of documents that
seeks to perform the functions that we mentioned above.
But many constitutions around the world exist only
on paper; they are mere words existing on a parchment.
The crucial question is: how effective is a constitution?
What makes it effective? What ensures that it has a real
impact on the lives of people? Making a constitution
effective depends upon many factors.
Mode of promulgation
This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who
crafted the constitution and how much authority did they
have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct
because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders
who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry
the people with them. The most successful constitutions,
like India, South Africa and the United States, are
constitutions which were created in the aftermath of
popular national movements. Although India’s
Constitution was formally created by a Constituent
Assembly between December 1946 and November What do people do if they find
1949, it drew upon a long history of the nationalist out that their constitution is
movement that had a remarkable ability to take along not just? What happens to
different sections of Indian society together. The people when a constitution
Constitution drew enormous legitimacy from the exists only on paper?

Debate over Constitution
fact that it was drawn up by people
making in Nepal:
who enjoyed immense public
Making a constitution is not always
credibility, who had the capacity
an easy and smooth affair. Nepal
to negotiate and command the is an example of the complicated
respect of a wide cross-section of nature of constitution making.
society, and who were able to Since 1948, Nepal has had five
constitutions, in 1948, 1951, 1959,
convince the people that the
1962 and 1990. But all these
constitution was not an instrument
constitutions were ‘granted’ by the
for the aggrandisement of their King of Nepal. The 1990
personal power. The final constitution introduced a multi-
document reflected the broad party competition, though the King
continued to hold final powers in
national consensus at the time.
many respects. For many years
Some countries have subjected
Nepal was faced with militant
their constitution to a full-fledged
political agitations for restructuring
referendum, where all the people the government. The main issue
vote on the desirability of a was the role of the monarchy in the
constitution. The Indian constitution of Nepal. Some groups
in Nepal wanted to abolish the
Constitution was never subjected
institution of monarchy and
to such a referendum, but
establish republican form of
nevertheless carried enormous government. Others believed that
public authority, because it had it may be useful to shift to limited
the consensus and backing of monarchy with a reduced role for
the King. The King himself was not
leaders who were themselves
ready to give up powers. He took
popular. Although the
over all powers in October 2002.
Constitution itself was not
Many political parties and
subjected to a referendum, the organisations demanded the
people adopted it as their own by formation of a new constituent
assembly. The Communist Party of
abiding by its provisions.
Nepal (Maoist) was in the forefront
Therefore, the authority of people
of the struggle for a popularly
who enact the constitution helps
elected constituent assembly.
determine in part its prospects for Finally, under pressure of popular
success. agitation, the King had to install a
government acceptable to the
agitating parties. This government
The substantive provisions of a
has stripped the King of almost all
constitution
powers. In 2008, Nepal emerged as
12 It is the hallmark of a successful a democratic republic after
constitution that it gives everyone abolishing the monarchy. Finally,
in society some reason to go along Nepal adopted a new constitution
in 2015.
with its provisions. A constitution

that, for instance, allowed permanent majorities to oppress minority
groups within society would give minorities no reason to go along 13
with the provision of the constitution. Or a constitution that
systematically privileged some members at the expense of others, or
that systematically entrenched the power of small groups in society,
would cease to command allegiance. If any group feels their identity
is being stifled, they will have no reason to abide by the constitution.
No constitution by itself achieves perfect justice. But it has to convince
people that it provides the framework for pursuing basic justice.
Do this thought experiment. Ask yourself this question: What
would be the content of some basic rules in society, such that they
gave everyone a reason to go along with them?
The more a constitution preserves the freedom and equality of
all its members, the more likely it is to succeed. Does the Indian
Constitution, broadly speaking, give everyone a reason to go along
with its broad outlines? After studying this book, one should be
able to answer this question in the affirmative.
Balanced institutional design
Constitutions are often subverted, not by the people, but by small
groups, who wish to enhance their own power. Well crafted
constitutions fragment power in society intelligently so that no single
group can subvert the constitution. One way of such intelligent
designing of a constitution is to ensure that no single institution
acquires monopoly of power. This is often done by fragmenting power
across different institutions. The Indian Constitution, for example,
horizontally fragments power across different institutions like the
Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and even independent
statutory bodies like the Election Commission. This ensures that
even if one institution wants to subvert the Constitution, others can
check its transgressions. An intelligent system of checks and
balances has facilitated the success of the Indian Constitution.
Another important aspect of intelligent institutional design is:
that a constitution must strike the right balance between certain
values, norms and procedures as authoritative, and at the same
time allow enough flexibility in its operations to adapt to changing
needs and circumstances. Too rigid a constitution is likely to break
under the weight of change; a constitution that is, on the other

|  | R C
EAD A ARTOON |
| --- | --- |
| Why d the ne castle descri Consti | oes the cartoonist describe w Iraqi Constitution as the of cards? Would this ption apply to the Indian tution? |



hand, too flexible, will give no security,
R C
EAD A ARTOON predictability or identity to a people.
Successful constitutions strike the right
balance between preserving core values and
adapting them to new circumstances. You
will notice the wisdom of makers of the
Indian Constitution in the chapter on the
Constitution as a living document (Chapter
9). The Indian Constitution is described as
‘a living’ document. By striking a balance
between the possibility to change the
provisions and the limits on such changes,
the Constitution has ensured that it will
survive as a document respected by people.
This arrangement also ensures that no
section or group can, on its own, subvert
the Constitution.
Why does the cartoonist describe Therefore in determining whether a
the new Iraqi Constitution as the constitution has authority you can ask
castle of cards? Would this yourself three questions:
description apply to the Indian – Were the people who enacted the
Constitution?
constitution credible? This question
will be answered in the remaining part
of this chapter.
– Secondly, did the constitution ensure
that power was intelligently organised so that it was not easy for
any group to subvert the constitution? And, most importantly,
does the constitution give everyone some reason to go along with
it? Most of this book is about this question.
– Also, is the constitution the locus of people’s hopes and
aspiration? The ability of the constitution to command voluntary
allegiance of the people depends to a certain extent upon whether
the constitution is just. What are the principles of justice
underlying the Indian Constitution? The last chapter of this book
will answer this question.
14 How was the Indian Constitution made?
Let us find out how the Indian Constitution was made. Formally, the
Constitution was made by the Constituent Assembly which had been
elected for undivided India. It held its first sitting on
50PES
,snootraC
elgaC
thgirypoc
,serA
,
”sdraC
fo
eltsaC“

9 December1946 and reassembled as Constituent Assembly for divided
India on 14 August 1947. Its members were chosen by indirect election
by the members of the Provincial Legislative Assemblies that had been
established under the Government of India Act, 1935. The Constituent
Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the
plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the
Cabinet Mission. According to this plan:
± Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were
allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly
in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were
under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the
Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats.
± The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main
communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their
respective populations.
± Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative
Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of
proportional representation with single transferable vote.
± The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely
States was to be determined by consultation.
For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html
“We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it
social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a
way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the
principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a
union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to
defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced
from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can
liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality,
liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things…”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p.979, 25 November 1949
Are the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity being practised in
your classroom? How can they coexist? Discuss this with your friends.

The previous section discusses the three factors that
make a constitution effective and respectable. How far
does the Indian Constitution pass this test?
Composition of the Constituent Assembly
As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of
3 June 1947 those members who were elected from
territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be
members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of
members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284
members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and
appended their signature to the Constitution as finally
passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January
1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the
backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition
unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the
fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to
draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also
learnt the right lessons from the unimaginable violence
that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was
committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not
only would minorities be secure, but religious identity
would have no bearing on citizenship rights.
But this account of the composition of the Constituent
Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only
the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although,
the members of the Assembly were not elected by
What would have happened if
universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make
the Constituent Assembly was
the Assembly a representative body. Members of all
elected by all the people of
religions were given representation under the scheme
India? Could it be very
described above; in addition, the Assembly had twenty-
different from what it was?
eight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of
political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly
occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in
the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was
such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate
almost all shades of opinion within it.

The Principle of Deliberation
The authority of the Constituent Assembly does not come only from
the fact that it was broadly, though not perfectly, representative. It
comes from the procedures it adopted to frame the Constitution and
the values its members brought to their deliberations. While in any
assembly that claims to be representative, it is desirable that diverse
sections of society participate, it is equally important that they
participate not only as representatives of their own identity or
community. Each member deliberated upon the Constitution with
the interests of the whole nation in mind. There were often
disagreements amongst members, but few of these disagreements
could be traced to members protecting their own interests.
There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences
were many: should India adopt a centralised or decentralised system
of government? What should be the relations between the States and
the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the
Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at
the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great
sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed
without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage
(meaning that all citizens reaching a certain age, would be entitled to
be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income).
So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who
should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously
discussed and debated. Nothing can be a better testament to the
democratic commitment of this Assembly.
The Constitution drew its authority from the fact that members
of the Constituent Assembly engaged in what one might call public
reason. The members of the Assembly placed a great emphasis on
discussion and reasoned argument. They did not simply advance
their own interests, but gave principled reasons to other members
for their positions. The very act of giving reasons to others makes
you move away from simply a narrow consideration of your own
interest because you have to give reasons to others to make them go
along with your view point. The voluminous debates in the

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| The Presi Dr. Rajen the Draft greeting | dent of the Constituent Assembly, dra Prasad and the Chairman of ing Committee, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar each other |
| “... I have with wha of the Dr Chairma indifferen never ma be ever s Drafting Chairma selection which he would be as amo Committ with the Chairma the coun CA | realised as nobody else could have, t zeal and devotion the members afting Committee and especially its n, Dr. Ambedkar in spite of his t health, have worked. We could ke a decision which was or could o right as when we put him on the Committee and made him its n. He has not only justified his but has added lustre to the work has done. In this connection, it invidious to make any distinction ng the other members of the ee. I know they have all worked same zeal and devotion as its n, and they deserve the thanks of try.” Dr. Rajendra Prasad D, Vol. XI, p.994, 26 November 1949 |



Constituent Assembly, where each clause of the Constitution was
subjected to scrutiny and debate, is a tribute to public reason at its
best. These debates deserved to be memorialised as one of the most
significant chapters in the history of constitution making, equal in
importance to the French and American revolutions.
Procedures
The importance of public reason
was emphasised in the mundane
procedures of the Assembly as
well. The Constituent Assembly
had eight major Committees on
different subjects. Usually,
Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra
Prasad, Sardar Patel or B.R.
Ambedkar chaired these
The President of the Constituent Assembly,
Committees. These were not men
Dr. Rajendra Prasad and the Chairman of
the Drafting Committee, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar who agreed with each other on many
greeting each other things. Ambedkar had been a bitter
“... I have realised as nobody else could have, critic of the Congress and Gandhi,
with what zeal and devotion the members accusing them of not doing enough
of the Drafting Committee and especially its
for the upliftment of Scheduled
Chairman, Dr. Ambedkar in spite of his
Castes. Patel and Nehru disagreed
indifferent health, have worked. We could
never make a decision which was or could on many issues. Nevertheless, they
be ever so right as when we put him on the all worked together. Each
Drafting Committee and made him its
Committee usually drafted
Chairman. He has not only justified his
selection but has added lustre to the work particular provisions of the
which he has done. In this connection, it Constitution which were then
would be invidious to make any distinction subjected to debate by the entire
as among the other members of the
Assembly. Usually an attempt was
Committee. I know they have all worked
with the same zeal and devotion as its made to reach a consensus with the
Chairman, and they deserve the thanks of belief that provisions agreed to by
the country.”
all, would not be detrimental to any
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
particular interests. Some
CAD, Vol. XI, p.994, 26 November 1949
provisions were subject to the vote.
18 But in each instance every single
argument, query or concern was
responded to with great care and
R C
EAD A ARTOON

in writing. The Assembly met for one hundred and sixty
six days, spread over two years and eleven months. Its 19
sessions were open to the press and the public alike.
IIIIInnnnnhhhhheeeeerrrrriiiiitttttaaaaannnnnccccceeeee ooooofffff ttttthhhhheeeee nnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaallllliiiiisssssttttt mmmmmooooovvvvveeeeemmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt
But no constitution is simply a product of the Assembly
that produces it. An Assembly as diverse as the
Constituent Assembly of India could not have functioned
if there was no background consensus on the main
principles the Constitution should enshrine. These
principles were forged during the long struggle for
freedom. In a way, the Constituent Assembly was giving
concrete shape and form to the principles it had inherited
from the nationalist movement. For decades preceding
the promulgation of the Constitution, the nationalist
movement had debated many questions that were
relevant to the making of the constitution — the shape
and form of government India should have, the values it
should uphold, the inequalities it should overcome.
Answers forged in those debates were given their final
form in the Constitution.
Perhaps the best summary of the principles that the
nationalist movement brought to the Constituent
Assembly is the Objective Resolution (the resolution that
defined the aims of the Assembly) moved by Nehru in
1946. This resolution encapsulated the aspirations and
values behind the Constitution. What the previous section
terms as substantive provisions of the constitution is
inspired by and summed up by the values incorporated
in the Objectives Resolution. Based on this resolution,
our Constitution gave institutional expression to these
fundamental commitments: equality, liberty, democracy,
What would have happened if
sovereignty and a cosmopolitan identity. Thus, our
we got independence in 1937?
Constitution is not merely a maze of rules and procedures,
Or if we had to wait till 1957?
but a moral commitment to establish a government that
Would our Constitution be
will fulfil the many promises that the nationalist movement very different from what it is
held before the people. today?

Main points of the Objectives Resolution
√
India is an independent, sovereign, republic;
√
India shall be a Union of erstwhile British Indian
territories, Indian States, and other parts outside
British India and Indian States as are willing to be a
part of the Union;
√
Territories forming the Union shall be autonomous
units and exercise all powers and functions of the
Government and administration, except those assigned
to or vested in the Union;
√
All powers and authority of sovereign and independent
India and its constitution shall flow from the people;
√
All people of India shall be guaranteed and secured
social, economic and political justice; equality of status
and opportunities and equality before law; and
fundamental freedoms - of speech, expression, belief,
faith, worship, vocation, association and action -
subject to law and public morality;
√
The minorities, backward and tribal areas, depressed
and other backward classes shall be provided adequate
safeguards;
√
The territorial integrity of the Republic and its sovereign
rights on land, sea and air shall be maintained
according to justice and law of civilized nations;
√
The land would make full and willing contribution to
the promotion of world peace and welfare of mankind.
Institutional arrangements
The third factor ensuring effectiveness of a constitution is a balanced
arrangement of the institutions of government. The basic principle is
that government must be democratic and committed to the welfare
of the people. The Constituent Assembly spent a lot of time on
evolving the right balance among the various institutions like the
executive, the legislature and the judiciary. This led to the
adoption of the parliamentary form and the federal arrangement,
which would distribute governmental powers between the

legislature and the executive on the one hand and
between the States and the central government on the 21
other hand.
While evolving the most balanced governmental
arrangements, the makers of our Constitution did not
hesitate to learn from experiments and experiences of
other countries. Thus, the framers of the Constitution
were not averse to borrowing from other constitutional
traditions. Indeed, it is a testament to their wide learning
that they could lay their hands upon any intellectual
argument, or historical example that was necessary for
fulfilling the task at hand. So they borrowed a number of
provisions from different countries.
But borrowing these ideas was not slavish imitation.
Was it a borrowed constitution
Far from it. Each provision of the Constitution had to be
then? Why could we not have
defended on grounds that it was suited to Indian
a constitution that does not
problems and aspirations. India was extremely lucky to
borrow anything from
have an Assembly that instead of being parochial in its
anywhere else?
outlook could take the best available everywhere in the
world and make it their own.
“One likes to ask whether there
can be anything new in a
Constitution framed at this hour
in the history of the world… The
only new things, if there can be
any, in a Constitution framed so
late in the day are the variations
made to remove the faults and to
accommodate it to the needs of
the country.”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
CAD, Vol. VII, p.37, 4 November 1948
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar presiding over a discussion in the
Constituent Assembly

Provisions adapted from
constitutions of different
countries
British Constitution
Irish
Constitution
First Past the Post
Directive
Parliamentary Form of
Principles of
Government
State Policy
The idea of the rule of law
French
Institution of the Speaker
Constitution
and her/his role
Principles of
Law-making procedure
Liberty, Equality
and Fraternity
United States
Constitution Canadian
Constitution
Charter of
Fundamental A quasi-federal form
Rights of government (a
federal system with a
Power of Judicial strong central
Review and government)
independence of
the judiciary The idea of Residual
Powers