Page 1:
Text:
1080 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
THE PUDUCHERRY TOWN AND COUNTRY
PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
(Bill No. 9 of 2025)
A
BILL
further to amend the Puducherry Town and Country
Planning Act, 1969.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of
Puducherry in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Puducheny
commencement. Town and Country Planning (Amendment)
Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union
territory of Puducheny.
(3) It shall come into force on and from the
date of its publication in the Official
Gazette.
Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Puducheny Town and
section 2.
Country Planning Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act),—
(1) after the existing clause (7), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(7-A) “Chief Town Planner” means, the
Town Planner appointed by the Government
under section 10;”
(2) after clause (9), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(9-A) “company” means—
(a) any company as defined in the
Companies Act, 2013 including any
foreign company within the meaning
of section 591 of that Act;



Page 2:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1081
(b) anybody corporate; or
(c) any firm or association (whether
incorporated or not), carrying on
business in the Union territory of
Puducherry. whether or not its
principal place of business is situated
in the said Union Territory;”
(3) after clause (10), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely: -
“(10-A) “Designated Officer” means, the
Senior Town Planner of the Town and Country
Planning Department appointed for the
implementation of the Town Planning Scheme;
(4) for clause (11), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(11) “development” means, the carrying out
of all or any of the works as contemplated in
an interim, comprehensive, detailed development
Central plan or a Town Planning Scheme prepared
Act No. under this Act, and shall include the carrying
18 of
out of building, engineering, mining or other
2013
operations in, or over or under land, or the
making of any material change in any building
or land, or in the use of any building, land and
includes redevelopment and layout and
sub-division of any land and ‘to develop’ shall
be construed, accordingly, and shall not include
the following operations or uses of the land for
the purpose of this Act, that is to say,—
(a) the carrying out of any temporary
works for the maintenance,
improvement or other alteration of
any building, being works which do
not materially affect the external
appearance of the building;



Page 3:
Text:
1082 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(b) the carrying out by a Local Authority
of any temporary works required for
the maintenance or improvement of a
road, or works carried out on the land
within the boundaries of the road;
(c) the carrying out by a Local Authority
or statutory undertaker of any
temporary works for the purpose of
inspecting, repairing or renewing any
sewers, mains, pipes, cables or other
apparatus, including the breaking
open of any street or other land for
that purpose;
(d) the use of any building or other land
within the curtilage of a dwelling
house for any purpose incidental to
the enjoyment of the dwelling house
as such; and
(e) the use of any land for the purpose
of agriculture, gardening or forest
(including afforestation) and the use
for any purpose specified in this
clause of this proviso of any building
occupied together with the land so
used;”
(5) for clause (12) the following shall be
substituted namely:—
(12) “Development plan” means, a plan for
the development or re-development or
improvement of the area within the jurisdiction
of a Planning Authority and includes an interim,
comprehensive, detailed development plan
prepared under the Act;”



Page 4:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1083
(6) after clause (12), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(12-A) “development right certificate”
means, the certificate to be issued under the
authentication of the Member-Secretary of the
Planning Authority including digital signature,
indicating the Floor Area Ratio credit in square
meters of the built-up area to which the owner
or lessee is entitled, the place from where it is
generated and the rate of that plot as prescribed
in the Guideline value as issued by the
Registration Department for the relevant year;
(12-B) “development rights” means, the right
to carry out the development or to develop the
land or building or both in the area specified
in the development right certificate;"
(7) after clause (13), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(13-A) “final Scheme” means, a final Scheme
relating to the Town Planning Scheme as
approved by the Government;
(13-B) “Floor Area Ratio” means, the
quotient obtained by dividing the total covered
area (plinth) on all the floors excepting the areas
specifically exempted by Notification by the plot
area, i.e.,
Total covered area on all
floors
Floor Area Ratio =
Plot area;”
(8) after clause (14), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—



Page 5:
Text:
1084 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
“(14-A) “heritage building” means, and
includes any building of one or more premises
or any part thereof and / or structure and / or
artifact which requires conservation and/or
preservation for historical and / or architectural
and / or artisanry and / or aesthetic and / or
cultural and / or environmental and / or
ecological purpose and includes such portion
of land adjoining such building or part thereof
as may be required for fencing or covering or
in any manner preserving the historical and /
or architectural and / or aesthetic and / or
cultural value of such building ;
(14-B) “heritage committee” means, the State
Level Heritage Conservation and Advisory
Committee constituted by the Government;
(14-C) “heritage precinct” means, and
includes any space that requires conservation
and / or preservation for historical and / or
architectural and / or aesthetic and / or cultural
and/or environmental and / or ecological
purpose. Walls or other boundaries of a
particular area or place or building or may
enclose such space by an imaginary line drawn
around it;
(14-D) “highway” has the same meaning as
in section 4 of the National Highways Act, 1956
(Central Act XLVIII of 1956);”
(9) after clause (16), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(16-A) “infrastructure and amenities
charges” means, fee levied on the institution
of use or change of use of any land or building
or development of any land or building to meet
the impact of development and to cover the
cost of providing capital facilities needed to
serve the development;”



Page 6:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1085
(10) after clause (21), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(21-A) “major street” means, a main street
connecting different localities;
(21-B) “Master Plan” means, a comprehensive
development plan prepared as per the Act in
the name of interim, comprehensive, detailed or
the Town Planning Scheme for a local planning
area covering the whole area or part thereof or
a joint planning area as the case may be,
conceived within the framework of the
perspective plan, if any, providing long-term
policies, programmes and detailed proposals for
spatial development of such area indicating the
manner in which the use of land and
development therein shall be carried out;
(21-C) “means of access” includes any
means, of passage, whether private or public,
for vehicles or for pedestrians and includes any
street;
(21-D) “Member-Secretary” means, the
Senior Town Planner appointed to the Planning
Authority as per section 10-A;
(21-E) “mitigation” means, the measures
taken in advance of a disaster aimed at
decreasing or eliminating its impact on society
and on environment including preparedness
Central and prevention.
Act XL
VIII of (21-F) “national highway” means, any
1956. highway declared to be a national highway
under section 2 of the National Highways Act,
1956;



Page 7:
Text:
1086 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(21-G) “natural disaster” means, a serious
disruption of the functioning of a Society,
causing widespread human, material or
environmental losses caused due to earthquake,
cyclone, flood or landslide which exceeds the
ability of the affected society to cope up using
only its own resources;
(21-H) “natural hazard prone areas” means,
areas likely to have,—
(i) moderate to very high damage risk
zone of earthquake, or
(ii) moderate to very high damage risk
of cyclones, or
(iii) significant flood flow or inundation,
or
(iv) landslide potential or proneness, or
(v) one or more of these hazards;”
(11) after clause (22), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(22-A) "Notification” means, a Notification
published in the Official Gazette;”
(12) after clause (23), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(23-A) “operational construction” means,
any construction whether temporary or
permanent which is necessary for operations,
maintenance, development or execution of
services essential to the life of the community
by the Government;”
(13) after clause (26), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
(26-A) “Preliminary Scheme” means, a
preliminary Scheme relating to a Town Planning
Scheme prepared by the Designated Officer;



Page 8:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1087
(26-B) “premium or purchasable Floor Area
Ratio” means, additional Floor Area Ratio
permitted over and above the ordinary Floor
Area Ratio on payment of premium, as may be
prescribed;
(14) after clause (30), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(30-A) “railway” has the same meaning as
in clause (31) of section 2 of the Indian
Railways Act, 1989 (Central Act 24 of 1989);
(30-B) “reconstituted plot” means, the
alteration of plots by the making of a
development plan otherwise than by the
severance of the land used, allotted or reserved
for any public purpose or a plot which is in any
way altered by making the Town Planning
Scheme;
(30-C) “reconstruction of a building”
includes,—
(a) the re-erection, wholly or partially of
a building after more than one half of
its cubical contents has been taken
down or burnt down or has fallen
down whether at one time or not;
(b) the re-erection, wholly or partially, of
any building of which an outer wall
has been taken down or burnt down
or has fallen down to or within three
metres of the ground adjoining the
lowest storey of the building, and of
any frame building which has so far
been taken down or burnt down or
has fallen down as to leave only the
framework of the lowest storey;



Page 9:
Text:
1088 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(c) the conversion into a dwelling house,
or a place of public worship of any
building not originally constructed
for human habitation or for public
worship, as the case may be, or the
conversion into more than one
dwelling-house of a building
originally constructed as one
dwelling-house only or the
conversion of dwelling-house into
factory;”
(d) the re-conversion into a dwelling-
house or a place of public worship or
a factory of any building—
(i) the use whereof as a dwelling-
house or a place of public
worship or a factory has been
discontinued; or
(ii) which has been appropriated for
any purpose other than for use as
a dwelling-house or a place of
public worship or a factory;”
(15) after clause (33), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(33-A) “ring road” means, any highway
connecting different parts within the planning
area in a ring or circular fashion;”
(16) for clause (35), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(35) “Scheme” means, a Town Planning
Scheme prepared under the Act, and includes
a plan or plans, together with the descriptive
matter, if any, relatively to such a Scheme;”



Page 10:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1089
(17) after clause (37), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(37-A) “Town Planning Scheme” means, the
Scheme in which land owned by the individual
or a group of individuals are pooled together
and developed by the Planning Authority and
part of such developed land is transferred to
the original owner and the remaining part of
such land is used for establishing common
facilities and amenities or for sale;”
“(37-B) “Transfer of Development Rights“
means, compensation in the form of additional
Floor Area Ratio or development rights, which
shall entitle the owner for construction of
additional built-up area, subject to such rules
and regulations as the Government or an
Authority under this Act may prescribe and the
Floor Area Ratio credit shall be issued in such
form as may be prescribed.”
3. In the principal Act, in sub-sections (3) and (4) Amendment of
of section 3, for words, “Senior Town Planner”, the Section 3.
words, “Chief Town Planner,” shall be substituted.
4. In the principal Act, the title of Chapter-III, for Amendment of
the words, “Senior Town Planner”, the words “Chief Title in
Chapter-III.
Town Planner,” shall be substituted.
5. In the principal Act, in sub-section (5) of Amendment of
Section 8.
section 8, for the existing words figures and numbers,
“sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013” and “section 6”,
the words figures and numbers “section 11 of the Right
Central to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Act 30
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013
of
2013. and section 19”, shall be substituted, respectively.



Page 11:
Text:
1090 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Amendment of 6. In the principal Act, in section 10, for the words
section 10.
“Senior Town Planner”, the words “Chief Town Planner”,
shall be substituted.
Amendment of 7. (i) In the principal Act, in section 11, after the
section 11. existing sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely: -
“(1-A) As soon as may be, after constitution
of the Planning Authority, the Government shall, by
Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Senior
Town Planner for each of the Planning Authority called
the “Member-Secretary” of the Planning Authority for
the purpose of carrying out the functions assigned to
him to this Act, Rules and Regulations made there
under.”
(2) In clause (ii) of sub-section 2 of the section 11,
of the words “the Senior Town Planner or any other
officer of the Town and Country Planning Department,
who shall be”, shall be deleted.”
Amendment of 8. (1) In the principal Act, after the sub-clause (d)
section 12 and of clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 12, the
insertion of
following shall be inserted, namely:—
section 12-A,
12-B and 12-C.
(e) “a Town Planning Scheme.”
(2) After the section 12, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“12-A. The Planning Authority with the
approval of the Committee and the Town and
Country Planning Board, and by Order of the
Government entrust to any Local Authority as
may be specified in such Order, the work of
execution of any Master Plan prepared by it.
12-B. The Planning Authority with the
approval of the Committee and the Town and
Country Planning Board, by Order of the
Government, authorize any Local Authority or



Page 12:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1091
other Authority or third-party expertise as may
be specified in such Order, to exercise any of
the powers vested in it or under this Act and
may in the like manner withdraw such
Authority; and the exercise of any power
delegated in this behalf shall be subject to such
restrictions and conditions as may be specified
in such Order.
12-C. The Planning Authority with the
approval of the Government may levy and
collect necessary fees / charges to carry out its
functions. The fees / charges collected shall be
utilized as per this Act and as may be
prescribed.”
9. (1) In the principal Act, in sub-sections (2) and Amendment of
(3) of section 18, for the words, “Senior Town Planner”, Section 18.
the words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
(2) The sub-section (6) of section 18, shall be
substituted with the following, namely: -
“(6) Proceedings under this section and
section 19 shall be deemed and have the same
effect as proceedings under section 15 of the
Central
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency
Act 30
of in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
2013. Resettlement Act, 2013”.
10. In the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and Amendment of
(2) of section 20, for the existing words “Senior Town Section 20.
Planner”, the words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be
substituted.
11. In the principal Act, in sub-section (2) of Insertion of
section 21, after the clause (d), the following clause shall clauses in section
21.
be inserted, namely:—
(e) include zones and regulations for premium
or purchasable floor area ratio, transfer of development
rights and implementation of the Scheme.”



Page 13:
Text:
1092 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Amendment of 12. In the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and
section 23.
(2) of section 23, for the words “Senior Town Planner”,
the words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 13. In the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and
section 29. (2) of section 29, for the words “Senior Town Planner”,
the words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 14. In the principal Act in sub-section (2) of
section 31. section 31, for the words “Senior Town Planner”, the
words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 15. In the principal Act, for sub-section (5) of
section 33. section 33, the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(5) The Notification under this section shall
be deemed and has the same effect as a declaration
under section 19 of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013
16. In principal Act, for section 34A, the following
Amendment of
section 34. shall be substituted, namely:—
“34 A. Change of Land use in the Development
Plans.— (1) The Government may suo moto or on a
reference from the Planning Authority, make such
modifications to the sanctioned development plan, as
it thinks fit and which in its opinion are necessary. The
Government may also delegate powers to the Planning
Authority for modification of land use for certain
parcels of land as prescribed in the regulations notified
by the Government.
(2) Any modification in the land use zonal
classification Plans shall be made only in
accordance with the regulations notified by the
Government.
(3) The Planning Authority shall levy such
fees and charges as may be prescribed in the
rule notified under in sub-section (2).



Page 14:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1093
(4) Any person changed his land use
without following the rules notified under
sub-section (2), penalty shall be imposed as per
the rule notified by the Government time to
time.
17. In the principal Act, after section 37, the Insertion of
sections 37-A,
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
37-B and 37-C.
“37-A. Levy of premium charges for grant of
premium or purchasable Floor Area Ratio.— (1) The
Planning Authority may grant permission for premium
or purchasable Floor Area Ratio in the areas identified
for the purpose in the zonal regulation of the Master
Plan or in the areas prescribed by the Government from
time to time;
(2) Where an application is made for grant
of permission for utilization of premium or
purchasable floor area ratio for the development
of a building under section 37, the Planning
Authority may levy premium charges at such
rates, as may be prescribed by the Government
from time to time, for grant of premium or
purchasable Floor Area Ratio.
37-B. Transfer of development rights.—
(1) Where any area is required for a public purpose and
the owner of any site or land which comprises such
area, surrenders it free of cost and handed over
possession of the same to the Planning / Local
Authority free from encumbrances, or maintains the land
or restricts development on the land as per the
requirement of the Government, the Planning Authority
may permit the transfer of development rights in
proportion to the land area surrendered or the
restrictions placed on developments in the manner
prescribed;



Page 15:
Text:
1094 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(2) The development rights so permitted
under sub-section (1) may be utilized either on
the remaining portion of the area after the
surrender if feasible, or at any other location
in the Union Territory equivalent in value of
land, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, either by the person surrendering
the land or suffering the restriction or any
other person to whom the original allottee of
the development rights has transferred such
rights.
37-C. Value Capturing Finance (VCF).—The
Planning Authority to raise or meet resources by
tapping a share of increase in value of land and other
properties like buildings resulting from public
investments and policy initiatives, in the identified area
of influence shall implement Value Capture Financing
technique in any form in the manner as prescribed by
the Government from time to time.”
Amendment of 18. In me Principal Act, in sub-section (4) of
section 38. section 38, for the words “Senior Town Planner”, the
words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 19. In the Principal Act, in sub-section (3) of
section 41. section 41, for the words “Senior Town Planner”, the
words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 20. In the he Principal Act, in sub-section (2) of
section 42. section 42, for the words "Senior Town Planner”, the
words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 21. In the Principal Act, for the clause (iii) of
section 47. sub-section (2) of section 47, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(iii) any matter related to preservations and
conservations of historical, architectural, environmental,
ecological or heritage purpose or other matters which
is to be or as may be prescribed.”



Page 16:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1095
22. In the Principal Act, in section 54, for the Amendment of
Section 54.
words “Senior Town Planner”, the words “Chief Town
Planner” shall be substituted.
23. In me Principal Act for me existing sub-section (2) Amendment of
of section 56, the following shall be substituted, Section 56.
namely:—
(2) All permit charges payable in respect of any
land or building by any person shall, together with
interest at the rate of six percent per annum upon any
amount outstanding up to the date of realization, be
recoverable from such person or his successor in
interest in such a land or building as on arrears of land
revenue.”
24. m me Principal Act, after the existing Insertion of
Section 56, the following sections shall be inserted, sections 56-A,
56-B, 56-C, 56-D
namely:—
and 56-E.
“56-A. Levy of infrastructure and amenities
charges.— (1) The Planning Authority while according
building permit under this Act, shall levy charges on
the institution of use or change of use of land or
building or development of any land or building in the
whole area or any part of the Planning area so as to
meet the impact of development and for ensuring
sustainable development of urban and rural areas by
providing adequate infrastructure and basic amenities
at the rates as determined in accordance with such
procedure as may be prescribed which shall not be less
than minimum and not more than the maximum as may
be prescribed, and different rates may be prescribed for
different parts of the Planning area and for different
uses.
(2) The infrastructure and amenities charges
shall be leviable on any person who undertakes
or carries out any such development or
institutes any use or changes any such use.



Page 17:
Text:
1096 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(3) The collection of the infrastructure and
amenities charges shall be made in such manner
as may be prescribed.
56-B. Constitution of State Infrastructure and
Amenities Fund.— (1) The Government may constitute
a fund called "Infrastructure and Amenities Fund" to
provide adequate infrastructure and basic amenities so
as to meet the impact on development and for ensuring
sustainable development of urban and rural area.
(2) The infrastructure and amenities charges
levied under section 56-A shall be credited to
this fund.
(3) The fund shall be operated, utilized and
maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed.
56-C. Levy of shelter charges.— (l) The
Planning Authority, while according permission under
this Act, shall levy charges on the institution of use or
change of use of land or building or development of
any land or building in the whole area or any part of
the planning area so as to contribute towards cost of
providing affordable housing to the poor in urban
areas, at the rates as determined in accordance with
such procedure as may be prescribed which shall not
be less than the minimum and not more than the
maximum as may be prescribed, and different rates may
be prescribed for different parts of the Planning area
and for different uses.
(2) The shelter charges shall be leviable on
any person who undertakes or carries out any
such development or institutes any use or
changes any such use.
(3) The collection of the shelter charges
shall be made in such manner as may be
prescribed.



Page 18:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1097
56-D. Constitution of State Shelter Fund.—
(1) The Government may constitute a fund called
“Shelter Fund” to provide for affordable housing to the
poor in urban areas.
(2) The shelter charges levied under section
56C shall be credited to this fund.
(3) The proceeds from other sources as
approved by the Government shall also be
credited to this fund.
(4) The fund shall be operated, utilized and
maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed.
56-E. Collection of any other charges.—(1) For
the purpose of conservation or preservation of areas
and structures related to historical and / or heritage and /
or architectural and / or aesthetic and / or cultural
significance, the Planning Authority may collect any
other charges as approved by the Government from time
to time.
(2) The Planning Authority shall operate,
utilize and maintain the fund so collected in
such manner as may be prescribed.”
25. In the principal Act, after Chapter – X, the Insertion of
following Chapter and sections shall be inserted, Chapter – X-A
and sections.
namely:—
"CHAPTER – X-A
TOWN PLANNING SCHEME
56-F. Declaration of intention to make a Town
Planning Scheme.— (1) The Planning Authority may,
by notification, for the purpose of development of any
area within its jurisdiction in an orderly holistic manner,
declare its intention to make a Town Planning Scheme
(hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the Scheme)
for that area:



Page 19:
Text:
1098 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Provided that the Planning Authority shall
obtain prior approval of the Government before
notification of such declaration:
Provided further that any appropriate
Planning Authority shall send such proposal to
the Government through the Chief Town
Planner, Town and Country Planning
Department:
Provided also that the Planning Authority
may adopt, with or without any modification,
the Scheme as proposed by any Government
Department, Company or Public Sector
Undertaking or Statutory Body owned or
controlled by the Government or the Central
Government or Co-operative Societies or by
seventy per cent of the land owners in the
Scheme area:
Provided further that where any Scheme is
not made for any specific areas, adjacent to any
Scheme, the owners or the lands of such area,
may make a request to the Planning Authority
to make a Scheme.
(2) A Scheme may be made in accordance
with the provisions of this Act in respect of any
land which is —
(i) in the course of development;
(ii) likely to be used for residential or
commercial or industrial or for
building purposes; or
(iii) already built upon.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
sub-section, the expression “land likely to be
used for building purposes” shall include any



Page 20:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1099
land likely to be used as, or for the purpose of
providing open spaces, roads, streets, parks,
pleasure or recreation grounds, parking spaces
or for the purpose of executing any work upon
or under the land incidental to the Scheme,
whether in the nature of a building work or not.
(3) The declaration under sub-section (1)
shall be published by the Planning Authority
in such manner as may be prescribed, by
notification in the Official Gazette and in two
leading daily newspapers in that area of which
one shall be in Tamil / Malayalam / Telugu
(respective region) and such notification shall
contain such particulars as may be prescribed
and specify the time and place where a plan
showing the boundaries of the proposed
Scheme area may be inspected by the public.
56-G. Power of the Government to require
appropriate Planning Authority to make a Scheme.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56-F, the
Government may direct the Planning Authority to make
a Scheme for any specific area and submit for their
approval. In such cases, the Planning Authority shall
proceed further for declaration of the intention of the
Scheme under section 56-F and for preparation of the
Scheme as provided in this Chapter.
56-H. Restrictions on Land Development
Work.— (1) On or after the date of publication of
declaration of the intention to make a Scheme under
section 56-F, no person shall within the area covered
under the Scheme, carry out any development work
without obtaining permission from the Planning
Authority:



Page 21:
Text:
1100 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Provided that on or after the date of
publication of the approved Draft Scheme, the
Planning Authority may, in consultation with
the Designated Officer, grant permission to any
Department of the Government, Public Sector
Undertaking or a Statutory Body owned or
controlled by the Government or the Central
Government to carry out any development
work:
Provided further that any other person may
also apply for permission in the form and in the
manner as may be prescribed, to carry out any
development work after publication of the
approved draft Scheme.
(2) On receipt of an application for
permission to carry out any development work
in the Scheme area, the Planning Authority
shall send a written acknowledgement therefor.
(3) The Planning Authority, after consultation
with the Designated Officer, may grant
permission to carry out the development work
within the Scheme area, having regard to the
purpose for which the permission is required
and the suitability of the place for such
purpose and subject to such conditions as it
may deem fit, or refuse to grant permission
stating the reason therefor:
Provided that any such condition shall be in
accordance with the approved draft Scheme.
(4) If any person contravenes the provisions
of sub-section (1) or any condition imposed
under sub-section (3), the Planning Authority
may direct such person by notice in writing to
stop the work in progress, and after making an
inquiry in the prescribed manner, remove, pull



Page 22:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1101
down, or alter any building or other development
and restore the land or building in respect of
which such contravention is made, to its
original condition.
(5) The restrictions imposed in this section
shall cease to operate in the event of lapse of
declaration of intention under sub-section (2)
of section 56-N or on the publication of the
preliminary Scheme under sub-section (2) of
section 56-T or on withdrawal of the Scheme
under section 56-Z.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), after publication of the draft
Scheme under sub-section (1) of section 56-N,
the Planning Authority may carry out any
development work within the Scheme area for
the purposes of the Scheme.
(7) The provisions of this section shall not
apply to any operational construction
undertaken by the Central Government or the
Government.
Explanation.— “operational construction”
means, any construction whether temporary or
permanent, which is necessary for the
operation, maintenance, development, or
execution of any of the following services,
namely:—
(a) Railways;
(b) National Highways;
(c) National Waterways;
(d) Major Ports;
(e) Airways and Aerodromes;



Page 23:
Text:
1102 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(f) Posts, Telephones, Wireless,
Broadcasting and other like forms of
communication;
(g) Regional grid for electricity;
(h) Defence;
(i) Metro Rail;
(j) Minor Ports; or
(k) any other service which the
Government is of the opinion that the
operation, maintenance, development
or execution of such service is
essential to the life of the community,
by notification, declare to be a
service for the purposes of this
clause;
(8) For removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that,— (i) new residential buildings
(other than gate lodges, quarters for limited
essential operational staff and the like), roads
and drains in railway colonies, hotels, clubs,
institutes and schools, in the case of railways;
and
(ii) a new building, new structure or new
installation or any extension thereof, in the case
of any other service, shall not be deemed to be
an operational construction.
56-1. Appointment of Designated Officer.—
(1) Within one month from the date of publication of
declaration of intention under sub-section (1) of section
56-F, the Government shall appoint an Officer not lower
in rank than that of the Senior Town Planner of the Town
and Country Planning Department as the Designated
Officer, for the purposes of the Scheme.



Page 24:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1103
(2) The Government may, if it thinks fit, at
any time remove, on the ground of
incompetence or misconduct or any other good
and sufficient reason a Designated Officer
appointed under this section and shall
forthwith appoint another person in his place
and any proceeding pending before Designated
Officer immediately before the date of his
removal shall be continued and disposed of by
the newly Designated Officer appointed in his
place:
Provided that no Designated Officer shall be
removed under this sub-section except after an
inquiry in which he has been informed of the
charges against him and a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges has been given to him.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2), a Designated Officer appointed under
sub-section (1) for the purpose of any Scheme
shall cease to hold office with effect from the
date on which the final Scheme is sanctioned
under section 56-X.
56-J. Duties of the Designated Officer.— The
duties of the Designated Officer are,—
(i) to involve with the Planning Authority, in
the examination of objections and suggestions
received on the draft Scheme;
(ii) to prepare the Preliminary Scheme and the
Final Scheme;
(iii) to give notice in the prescribed manner
and in the prescribed form to the persons
affected by the Scheme, define and demarcate
the areas allotted to, or reserved for, any public
purpose, or for a purpose of the Planning
Authority and the final plots;



Page 25:
Text:
1104 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(iv) to give notice as aforesaid, determine the
period within which the works provided in the
Scheme shall be completed by the appropriate
Authority;
(v) to provide for the total or partial transfer
of any right in an original plot to a final plot or
provide for the transfer of any right in an
original plot in accordance with the provisions
of section 56-AF;
(vi) to fix the difference between the total of
the values of the original plots and the total of
the values of the plots included in the Scheme
in accordance with the provisions of clause (f)
of sub-section (1) of section 56-AB;
(vii) to determine whether the areas used,
allotted or reserved for a public purpose or
purposes of the appropriate Authority are
beneficial wholly or partly to the owners or
residents within the area of the Scheme;
(viii) to estimate the portion of the sums
payable as compensation on each plot used,
allotted or reserved for a public purpose or for
the purpose of the appropriate Authority which
is beneficial partly to the owners or residents
within the area of the Scheme and partly to the
general public, which shall be included in the
costs of the Scheme;
(ix) to calculate the contribution to be levied
under sub-section (1) of section 56-AD, on each
plot used, allotted or reserved for a public
purpose or for the purpose of the appropriate
Authority which is beneficial partly to the
owners or residents within the area of the
Scheme and partly to the general public;



Page 26:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1105
(x) to determine the amount of exemption, if
any, from the payment of contribution that may
be granted in respect of plots exclusively
occupied for religious or charitable purposes;
(xi) to estimate the increment to accrue in
respect of each plot included in the Scheme in
accordance with the provisions of section
56-AC ;
(xii) to estimate the amount to be collected
from or to be paid to the land owners as per
section 56-V, 56-AD, 56-AE, 56-AJ and 56-AC;
(xiii) to determine the compensation amount
payable to the land owners as per section 56-V,
56-AD and 56-AI;
(xiv) to draw in the prescribed form
the preliminary and the final Scheme in
accordance with the draft Scheme;
(xv) to be present at the proceedings before
the Board of appeal; and
(xvi) for such other matters as may
be prescribed.
Provided that the Designated Officer may
make variation from the draft Scheme, but no
such variation, if it is to involve an increase
often percent in the cost of the draft Scheme
of the Planning Authority, shall be made except
with the previous sanction of the Government.
56-K. Certain decisions of the Designated
Officer to be final.— (1) Every decision of the
Designated Officer in matters, other than estimation of
costs, estimation of the amount payable to or by the
owners, determination of the compensation payable to
the owners and transfer of development rights shall be
final and binding on all concerned;



Page 27:
Text:
1106 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(2) On the request of the Planning Authority,
the Designated Officer may split up the draft
Scheme in to different sections and to deal with
each section separately as if such section were
a separate draft Scheme.
56-L. Disputed ownership.— (1) Where there
is a disputed claim to the ownership of any land or
building included in an area in respect of which the
declaration of intention to prepare a Scheme has been
made, and any entry in the revenue records or mutation
relevant to such disputed claim is inaccurate or
inconclusive, on the request of the Planning Authority
or the Designated Officer, at any time before the Scheme
is made, the Government may cause an inquiry to be
made by such Officer, within such time, as may be
prescribed, for the purpose of including such land or
building in the Scheme area, unless the civil Court or
the Authority, otherwise directs and the Order or
decision of the civil Court or Authority thereon shall
bind the Planning Authority or the Designated Officer.
(2) Where any Decree is passed by the civil
Court, after the Final Scheme has been
approved by the Government under section 56-
X, such Final Scheme shall be deemed to have
been suitably varied to the extent of such
Decree.
56-M. Contents of Draft Scheme.— The draft
Scheme may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the area, ownership and tenure of such
original plot;
(b) laying out or re-laying out, of land, either
vacant or already built upon, as building sites;
(c) construction, diversion, extension,
alteration, improvement or closure of lanes,
streets, roads and communications;



Page 28:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1107
(d) construction, alteration, removal or
demolition of buildings, bridges and other
structures;
(e) redistribution of boundaries and
reconstitution of plots belonging to owners of
properties in the Scheme area;
(f) disposal by sale, exchange, lease or
otherwise of land acquired or owned by the
Planning Authority;
(g) transport facilities;
(h) water-supply;
(i) lighting;
(j) drainage, inclusive of sewerage and of
surface drainage and sewage disposal;
(k) allotment or reservation of land for
streets, roads, squares, houses, buildings for
religious or charitable purpose, open spaces,
gardens, recreation grounds, schools, markets,
shops, factories, hospitals, dispensaries, public
buildings and public purposes of all kinds and
defining and demarcating of the reconstituted
plots or the areas allotted to or reserved for the
above-mentioned purposes;
(l) demarcation of places or objects and
buildings of archaeological or historical interest
or natural scenic beauty or used for religious
purposes or regarded by the public with
veneration, or protection of canal, tank or river
sides, coastal areas and other places of natural
or landscape beauty;
(m) imposition of conditions and restrictions
in regard to the character, density, architectural
features and height of buildings, building or



Page 29:
Text:
1108 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
control lines for roads, railway lines and power
supply lines and the purposes for which
buildings or specified areas may or may not be
appropriated and the provision and
maintenance of sufficient open spaces, the
discontinuance of objectionable uses of lands
in any area in specified periods, parking spaces,
loading and unloading spaces for any building
and the sizes or locations of projections and
advertisement signs;
(n) filling up or reclamation of low lying,
swampy or unhealthy areas, or leveling up of
land;
(o) layout of new streets or roads,
construction, diversion, extension, alteration,
improvement and closing up of streets and
roads and discontinuance of utility connections,
communication lines, etc.;
(p) allotment of land to the extent of not
more than forty per cent of the total area
covered under the Scheme, in the aggregate, for
any or all of the following purposes, namely:—
(i) for roads;
(ii) for parks, play grounds, gardens and
open spaces;
(iii) for social infrastructure such as
school, dispensary, fire and rescue
service and public utilities;
(iv) for sale by the appropriate Planning
Authority for residential, commercial,
institutional or industrial use,
depending upon the nature of
development;



Page 30:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1109
(v) reservation of land up to the extent
often per cent of the total area
covered under the Scheme, in the
aggregate, for the purpose of
providing housing accommodation to
the members of economically weaker
section and for persons
dispossessed of their properties in
the Scheme area:
Provided that the proceeds from the sale of
land referred to in sub-clause (iv) shall be used
for the purpose of providing infrastructural
facilities and payment of compensation as per
the Final Scheme;
(q) returning reconstituted plots to the
extent of not less than sixty per cent or for
providing compensation in accordance with the
Final Scheme; and
(r) for such other matters as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
Chapter, ‘reconstituted plot’ means, a plot
which is in any way altered by the making of
the Scheme and includes alteration of
ownership of a plot.
56-N. Making and publication of the Draft
Scheme.— (1) Within nine months from the date of
publication of the declaration of the intention to make
a Scheme under section 56-F, the Planning Authority
shall, in consultation with the Designated Officer, make
a draft Scheme for the Scheme area and publish the
same in the Official Gazette, along with the draft
regulations, if any, for carrying out the provisions of
the Scheme, in such manner as may be prescribed:



Page 31:
Text:
1110 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Provided that on a request by the Planning
Authority, the Government may, by notification,
extend the aforesaid period, for a further period
of six months.
(2) If publication of a draft Scheme is not
made within the said total period of fifteen
months, the declaration of intention to make a
Scheme shall lapse:
Provided that any such lapse of declaration
shall not prevent the Government from making
a fresh declaration at any time in respect of the
same area.
56-O. Reconstitution of plots.— (1) In the draft
Scheme referred to in section 56-N, the size and shape
of every plot shall be determined, so far as may be, to
render it suitable for building purposes and where a plot
is already built upon, suitable alterations shall be made
to the buildings, so as to comply with the provisions
of the Scheme.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the
draft Scheme may contain the following
proposals, namely:—
(a) to form a final plot by reconstitution
of an original plot, by alteration of
the boundaries of the original plot, if
necessary;
(b) to form a final plot from an original
plot by re-adjusting wholly or partly
of the adjoining lands;
(c) to provide, with the consent of the
owners, that two or more original
plots each of which is held in
ownership severally or in joint
ownership shall hereafter, with or
without alteration of boundaries, be
held in ownership in common as a
final plot;



Page 32:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1111
(d) to allot a final plot to any owner
dispossessed of land in furtherance
of the Scheme; or
(e) to pass on the ownership of an
original plot from one person to
another.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
Chapter.—
(i) “final plot” means, a plot reconstituted
from an original plot and allotted in
a Scheme as a final plot;
(ii) “original plot” means, the corresponding
plot held in single or joint ownership
and numbered to be shown as one
single plot by the Planning Authority
for the purposes of the Scheme.
(3) Where under clause (m) of section 56-M,
the purpose to which buildings or specified
areas may not be appropriated have been
specified, the buildings shall cease to be used
for a purpose other than the purposes specified
in the Scheme within such time as may be
specified in the final Scheme and the person
affected by the provision shall be entitled to
compensation from the appropriate Authority in
the manner and according to the method
prescribed.
56-P. Public consultation to the Draft
Scheme.— Any person may, within sixty days from the
date of publication of the draft Scheme under section
56-N, submit his objection or suggestion in writing to
the Planning Authority. The Planning Authority shall
consider such objection or suggestion and may modify
the draft Scheme, in consultation with the Designated
Officer as it deems fit and submit the same not later than
thirty working days to the Government for approval.



Page 33:
Text:
1112 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
56-Q. Approval of the Draft Scheme by the
Government.— (1) The Government may, on receipt of
the draft Scheme under section 56-P after making such
inquiry as they may deem fit and after consulting the
Chief Town Planner or the Planning Authority
concerned, as the case may be, not later than three
months from the date of its receipt,—
(i) either approve the draft Scheme, with or
without modifications and subject to such
conditions as they may deem fit; or
(ii) refuse to approve the draft Scheme; or
(iii) return the draft Scheme to the Planning
Authority to carry out such modifications and
within such period as may be directed,
including a direction to include or exclude any
land in the Draft Scheme. The Planning
Authority, in consultation with the Designated
Officer, shall comply with such directions of the
Government and re-submit the draft Scheme
within one month from the date of receipt of
such directions to the Government for approval.
(2) As soon as on receipt of the modified draft
Scheme from the Planning Authority, the
Government not later than six months may
approve the draft Scheme and the approved
draft Scheme shall be published in the Official
Gazette and in two leading daily newspapers in
that area (region), of which one shall be in Tamil /
Malayalam / Telugu (respective region).
The approved draft Scheme shall also be placed
in the public domain for inspection during the
office hours in the Planning Authority and in
the office of the Designated Officer.
56-R. Vesting of the land with the Planning
Authority.— On expiry of a period of two months from
the date of publication of the approved draft Scheme
under sub-section (2) of section 56-Q, all lands required



Page 34:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1113
for the purposes as specified in clauses (g), (h), (i), (j)
and (o) of section 56-M, shall vest with the Planning
Authority free from all encumbrances. The Planning
Authority may take appropriate measures as may be
required including eviction, removal of structures or
buildings in contravention of the Scheme, locking and
sealing and recover the cost incurred therefor, in such
manner as may be prescribed, in the said lands for
enforcement of the said public purposes:
Provided that such vesting of lands with the
appropriate Planning Authority shall not affect
the ownership right of the owners of such
lands.
56-S. Preparation of the Preliminary
Scheme.— (1) The Designated Officer shall, after taking
into consideration the objections, if any, received on
the approved draft Scheme within a period of nine
months from the date of its publication, prepare the
Preliminary Scheme as per section 56-J in the prescribed
manner and in the prescribed form, after giving notice
to the owners of the land in the Scheme area.
The Preliminary Scheme shall,-
(a) define and demarcate the areas allotted
to, or reserved for, any public purpose, or for
the purpose of the appropriate Planning
Authority and also demarcate the final plots;
(b) decide the person or persons to whom a
final plot is to be allotted and when such plot
is to be allotted to persons in common
ownership, decide the shares of such persons;
(c) provide for the total or partial transfer of
any right in an original plot to a final plot;
(d) record the rights of secured creditors,
mortgagees, lessees or other persons who claim
to have secured interest in the original plot;



Page 35:
Text:
1114 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(e) an estimate of the cost of the Scheme to
be borne by the stakeholders;
(f) specify the period within which the works
provided in the Scheme may be completed by
the Planning / Local / appropriate Authority;
and
(g) for any other prescribed particulars. (2)
The Designated Officer shall submit the
Preliminary Scheme so prepared, through the
Planning Authority and the Chief Town Planner,
to the Government for approval.
56-T. Approval of the Preliminary Scheme by
the Government.— (1) On receipt of the Preliminary
Scheme, the Government shall, within two months from
the date of its receipt, either approve or approve with
such modifications as may be considered necessary or
may return the said Scheme to the Designated Officer
to modify the Scheme or to prepare a fresh Scheme, in
accordance with such directions and within such period
as the Government may specify in this behalf.
(2) The Preliminary Scheme, as approved by
the Government shall be published in the
Official Gazette and in two leading daily
newspapers in that area, of which one shall be
in Tamil / Malayalam / Telugu (respective
region) and such notification shall state the
place and time at which the said Scheme shall
be open to inspection by the public.
(3) Such notification shall fix a date, in which
all the liabilities created by the Scheme shall
come into force :
Provided that the Government may from time
to time extend such date, by notification, for
such period, not exceeding three months, as it
thinks fit.



Page 36:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1115
(4) A notification under sub-section (2) shall
be the conclusive evidence that the Preliminary
Scheme has been duly made and approved.
56-U. Effect of Preliminary Scheme.— (1) On
and after the date on which the Preliminary Scheme is
published in the Official Gazette,—
(a) all lands required by the appropriate
Planning Authority shall, unless it is otherwise
determined in such Scheme, vest absolutely
with the appropriate Planning Authority free
from all encumbrances; and
(b) all rights in the original plot which have
been reconstituted into final plots shall be
determined and the final plots shall be subject
to the rights of the original land owners, as
settled by the Designated Officer.
(2) The Planning Authority shall take such
measures as may be required,—
(a) to enforce the Scheme, including
eviction, removal of structures or buildings in
contravention of the Scheme, locking and
sealing and recover the cost incurred therefor,
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) execute any work which it is the duty of
any person to execute under the Scheme in any
case where it appears that the delay in execution
of the work would prejudice the efficient
operation of the Scheme and any expenses
incurred shall be recovered from the person in
default or from the owner of the plot in such
manner as may be prescribed, and
(c) no person shall be entitled to
compensation in respect of any damage, loss
or injury resulting from all action taken by the
Planning Authority under the provision of the



Page 37:
Text:
1116 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
section except in respect of the building or work
began before the date referred to in sub-section
(3) of section 56-T and only in so far as such
building or work has proceeded until that date:
Provided that any claim to compensation
which is not barred by these sub-section shall
be subject to the condition of any agreement
entered between the claimant and the Planning
Authority;
(d) to carry out mutation in the records of
the Revenue, Survey and Settlement and
Registration Departments as per the allotment
of the final plots including plots reserved for
public purposes, made in the Preliminary
Scheme.
56-V. Preparation of the Final Scheme.—
(1) The Designated Officer shall, after publication of the
Preliminary Scheme in the Official Gazette of Puducheny
within a period of nine months therefrom, prepare the
Final Scheme in the manner specified hereunder:—
(a) estimate the value of the original plots
and fix the difference between the values of the
original plots and the values of the final plots
in the Scheme area, in the manner prescribed;
(b) determine whether the areas allotted or
reserved for public purposes or for
development by the Planning Authority are
beneficial wholly or partly to the land owners
or residents in the Scheme area;
(c) estimate in the manner prescribed, the
sums payable as compensation on each plot
used, allotted or reserved for a public purpose
or for the purpose of the Planning Authority,



Page 38:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1117
which is beneficial partly to the owners or
residents within the Scheme area and partly to
the general public, and the compensation so
payable shall be included in the cost of the
Scheme;
(d) estimate the increment in value, in the
manner prescribed, that may accrue in respect
of each plot included in the Scheme area;
(e) calculate the betterment contribution, in
the manner prescribed, to be levied on each
plot in the Final Scheme, in proportion to the
increment in value estimated to accrue in
respect of such plot:
Provided that no betterment contribution
shall be levied in respect of plots exclusively
allotted for religious or charitable purpose;
(f) estimate in the manner prescribed with
reference to the claims made before him for
compensation to be paid to any land owner for
his right prejudicially affected because of the
Scheme;
(g) record the person to whom the final plot
is allotted in accordance with the Preliminary
Scheme in the form and in the manner as may
be prescribed; (h) do such other acts as may
be prescribed.
(2) As soon as on the preparation of the
Final Scheme, the Designated Officer shall
communicate the details including the quantum
of amount arrived at with respect to clauses (a)
to (f) of sub-section (1) to the persons
concerned and to the Planning Authority
before submission of the Final Scheme to the
Government for approval.



Page 39:
Text:
1118 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
56-W. Appeal.— (1) Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Designated Officer communicated
under sub-section (2) of section 56-V may, within one
month from the date of its receipt, appeal to the Board,
in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section
(1), the Board, within a period of two months,
dispose of the appeal after giving the Appellant
an opportunity of being heard.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Board, may within one month from the date
of communication of such decision under
sub-section (2), appeal to the Government in
such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Government may entertain
an appeal made beyond the said period, if they
are satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause for not making the appeal
in time.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section
(3), the Government shall within two months,
after giving the appellant an opportunity of
being heard, pass such order as they think fit.
56-X. Approval of the Final Scheme by the
Government.— (1) On receipt of the Final Scheme from
the Designated Officer, the Government shall, within
two months from the date of its receipt either approve
or approve with such modifications as may be
considered necessary. The Designated Officer shall
thereafter modify the Scheme, if so directed by the
Government and submit it to the Government for
approval.
Explanation.— For the purpose of
calculating the time-limit of two months, the
period during which appeals, if any, were
pending before the Board and the Government
shall be excluded.



Page 40:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1119
(2) The Final Scheme, as approved shall be
published in the Official Gazette and in two
leading daily newspapers in that area, of which
one shall be in Tamil / Malayalam / Telugu
(respective region) and such notification shall
state the place and time at which the Scheme
shall be open to inspection by the public.
(3) A notification under sub-section (2) shall
be conclusive evidence that the Final Scheme
has been duly made and approved.
56-Y. Variation of Scheme.— (1) After publication
of the Final Scheme, if the Planning Authority, either
suo motu or on application by a owner of any land in
the, Scheme area, considers that the Scheme is defective
on account of any error, irregularity or infirmity, it may
request the Government for appropriate variation of the
Scheme:
Provided that any request for further
variation of the Scheme shall not be
entertained by the Government.
(2) On receipt of such request from the
Planning Authority, the Government may, if
satisfied, vary the Scheme by publishing the
variation in the Official Gazette and in two
leading daily newspapers in that area, of which
one shall be in Tamil / Malayalam / Telugu
(respective region):
Provided that the use of land allotted for the
purposes of parks, playgrounds, gardens and
open spaces shall not be changed for any other
purpose.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-sections (1) and (2), a Final Scheme may
be varied or revoked by a subsequent Scheme
prepared and approved in accordance with this
Act.



Page 41:
Text:
1120 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
56-Z. Withdrawal of the Scheme.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the
Government may by order, for reasons to be recorded,
withdraw any Scheme:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be
ordered after approval of the Preliminary
Scheme:
Provided further that on such withdrawal of
the Scheme, the lands shall be restored to the
original condition, as it stood on the date of
publication of declaration of the intention
under section 56-F, at the cost of the
Government.
56-AA. Costs of the Scheme.— (1) The costs
of the Scheme shall include—
(a) all sums payable by the Planning
Authority under the provisions of this Act,
which are not specifically excluded from the
costs of the Scheme;
(b) all sums spent or estimated to be spent
by the Planning Authority in the making and
execution of the Scheme:
Provided that the estimates shall be with
reference to the period during which the
preliminary Scheme is to be implemented after
it is sanctioned under section 56-T;
(c) all sums payable as compensation for
land reserved or designated for any public
purpose or for the purposes of the appropriate
Authority which is solely beneficial to the
owners of land or residents within the area of
the Scheme;



Page 42:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1121
(d) such portion of the sums payable as
compensation for land reserved or designated
for any public purpose or for the purpose of
the Planning Authority which is beneficial
partly to the owners of land or residents within
the area of the Scheme and partly to the general
public, as is attributable to the benefit accruing
to the owners of land or residents within the
area of the Scheme from such reservation or
designation;
(e) all legal expenses incurred by the
Planning Authority in the making and in the
execution of the Scheme;
(f) any amount by which the total amount of
the values of the original plots exceeds the total
amount of the values of the plots included in
the final Scheme, each of such plots being
estimated at its market value at the date of the
declaration of intention to make a Scheme, with
all the buildings and works thereon at the said
date and without reference to improvements
contemplated in the Scheme other than
improvements due to alteration of its
boundaries;
(g) twenty percent of the amount of the cost
of infrastructure provided in the area adjacent
to the area of the Scheme as is necessary for
the purpose of and incidental to the Scheme.
(2) If in any case the total amount of the
values of the plots included in the final Scheme
exceeds the total amount of the values of the
original plots, each of such plots being
estimated in the manner as provided in clause



Page 43:
Text:
1122 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(f) of sub-section (1), then the amount of such
excess shall be deducted in arriving at the costs
of the Scheme as defined in sub-section (1).
56-AB. Calculation of increment.— For the
purpose of this Act, the increments shall be deemed to
be the amount by which at the date of the declaration
of intention to make a Scheme the market value of the
plot included in the final Scheme estimated on the
assumption that the Scheme has been completed shall
exceed at the same date the market value of the same
plot estimated without reference to improvements
contemplated in the Scheme:
Provided that in estimating such value, the
value of the buildings or other works erected
or in the course of erection on such plot shall
not be taken into consideration.
56-AC. Contribution towards cost of the
Scheme.— (1) The costs of the Scheme shall be met
wholly or in part by a contribution to be levied by the
appropriate Authority on each plot included in the final
Scheme calculated in proportion to the increment which
is estimated to accrue in respect of such plot by the
Designated Officer :
Provided that—
(i) (a) where the cost of the Scheme
does not exceed half the increment,
the cost shall be met wholly by a
contribution, and
(b) where it exceeds half the
increment, to the extent of half the
increment it shall be met by a
contribution and the excess shall be
borne by the appropriate Authority;



Page 44:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1123
(ii) where a plot is subject to a mortgage
with possession or to a lease, the
Designated Officer shall determine in
what proportion the mortgagee or
lessee on the one hand and the
mortgagor or lessor on the other
hand shall pay such contribution;
(iii) no such contribution shall be levied
on a plot used, allotted or reserved
for a public purpose or for the
purpose of the appropriate Authority
which is solely beneficial to the
owners of land or residents within the
area of the Scheme; and
(iv) the contribution levied on a plot
used, allotted or reserved for a public
purpose or for the purpose of the
appropriate Authority which is
beneficial partly to the owners of land
or residents within the area of the
Scheme and partly to the general
public shall be calculated in
proportion to the benefit estimated to
accrue to the general public from
such use, allotment or reservation.
(2) The owner of each plot included in the
final Scheme shall be primarily liable for the
payment of the contribution leviable in respect
of such plot.
56-AD. Certain amounts to be added to, or
deducted from contribution leviable from a person.—
The amount by which the total value of the plots
included in the final Scheme with all the buildings and
works thereon allotted to a person falls short of or
exceeds the total value of the original plots with all the



Page 45:
Text:
1124 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
buildings and works thereon of such person shall be
deducted from, or, as the case may be, added to, the
contribution leviable from such person, each of such
plots being estimated at its market value at the date of
the declaration of intention to make a Scheme or the
date of the notification issued by the Government under
section 56-G and without reference to improvements
contemplated in the Scheme other than improvements
due to the alteration of its boundaries.
56-AE. Transfer of right from the original to
final plot or extinction of such right.— Any right in
an original plot which in the opinion of the Designated
Officer is capable of being transferred wholly or in part,
without prejudice to the making of a Scheme, to a final
plot shall be so transferred and any right in an original
plot which in the opinion of the Designated Officer is
not capable of being so transferred shall be
extinguished:
Provided that an agricultural lease shall not
be transferred from an original plot to a final
plot without the consent of all the parties to
such lease.
56-AF. Compensation in respect of property or
right injuriously affected by the Scheme.— The owner
of any property or right which is injuriously affected
by the making of a Scheme shall, if he makes a claim
before the Designated Officer within the prescribed
time, be entitled to be compensated in respect thereof
by the appropriate Authority or by any person
benefitted or partly by the appropriate Authority and
partly by such person as the Designated Officer may in
each case determine :
Provided that the value of such property or
rights shall be deemed to be its market value at
the date of the declaration of intention to make
a Scheme or the date of the notification issued
by the Government under section 56-G without
reference to improvements contemplated in the
Scheme, as the case may be.



Page 46:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1125
56-AG. Exclusion of compensation in certain
cases.— (1) No compensation shall be payable in
respect of any property or private right which is alleged
to be injuriously affected by reason of any provisions
contained in the Scheme, if under any other law for the
time being in force applicable to the area for which such
Scheme is made, no compensation is payable for such
injurious by attached .
(2) Any property or private right shall not
be deemed to be injuriously affected by reason
of any provision inserted in a Scheme which
imposes any conditions and restrictions in
regard to any of the matters specified in clause
(m) of section 56-M.
56-AH. Provision for cases in which the
amount payable to owners exceeds amount due from
him.— If the owner of an original plot is not provided
with a plot in the preliminary Scheme or if the
contribution to be levied from him under section 56-AD
is less than the total amount to be deducted therefrom
under any of the provisions of this Act, the net amount
of his loss shall be payable to him by the appropriate
Authority in cash or in such other manner as may be
agreed upon by the parties.
56-AL Provision for cases in which the amount
is payable by the owner.—(1) If from any cause the total
amount which shall be due to the appropriate Authority
under the provisions of this Act from the owner of a
plot to be included in the final Scheme exceeds the value
of such plot estimated on the assumption that the
Scheme has been completed, the Designated Officer
shall at the request of the appropriate Authority direct
the owner of such plot to make payment to the
appropriate Authority of the amount of such excess.



Page 47:
Text:
1126 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(2) If such owner fails to make such payment
within the prescribed period, the Designated
Officer shall, if the appropriate Authority so
requests, acquire the original plot of such
defaulter and apportion the compensation
among the owner and other persons interested
in the plot on payment by the appropriate
Authority of the value of such plot estimated
at its market value at the date of the declaration
of intention to make a Scheme or the date
of a notification under section 56-G and
without reference to improvements contemplated
in the Scheme; and thereupon the plot included
in the final Scheme shall vest absolutely with
the appropriate Authority free from all
encumbrances but subject to the provisions of
this Act:
Provided that the payment made by the
appropriate Authority on account or the value
of the original plot shall not be included in the
costs of the Scheme.
56-AJ. Payment by adjustment of account.—
All payments due to be made to any person by the
appropriate Authority under this Act shall, as far as
possible, be made by adjustment in such account with
the appropriate Authority in respect of the plot
concerned or of any other plot in which he has an
interest and failing such adjustment, shall be paid in
cash or in such other manner as may be agreed upon
by the parties.
56-AK. Payment of net amount due to the
Planning Authority.— (1) The net amount payable under
the provisions of this Act by the owner of a plot
included in the final Scheme may at the option of the
contributor be paid in lump-sum or in annual
installments not exceeding ten.



Page 48:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1127
Central (2) If the owner elects to pay the amount by
Act No.
installments, interest at such rate as is arrived
Z of
1934. at by adding two percent to the bank rate
published under section 49 of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934, from time to time, shall
be charged per annum on the net amount
payable.
(3) If the owner of a plot fails to exercise the
option on or before the date specified in a
notice issued to him in that behalf by the
appropriate Authority, he shall be deemed to
have exercised the option of paying
contribution in installments and the interest on
the contribution shall be calculated from the
date specified in the notice, being the date
before which he was required to exercise the
option.
(4) Where two or more plots included in the
final Scheme are of the same ownership the net
amount payable by such owner under the
provisions of this Act shall be distributed over
his several plots in proportion to the
increments which is estimated to accrue in
respect of each plot unless the owner and the
appropriate Authority agree to a different
method of distribution.
56-AL. Power of the Planning Authority to
make agreement.— (1) The appropriate Authority shall
be of competent to make any agreement with any
person in respect of any matter which is to be provided
for in a Scheme, subject to the power of the Government
to modify or disallow such agreement and unless, it is
otherwise expressly provided therein, such agreement
shall take effect on and after the day on which the
Scheme comes into force.



Page 49:
Text:
1128 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(2) Such agreement shall not in any way
affect the duties of the Designated Officer as
described in Section 56-J or the rights of third
parties but, it shall be binding on the parties
to the agreement notwithstanding any decision
that may be passed by the Designated Officer:
Provided that if the agreement is modified by
the Government, either party shall have the
option of avoiding it, if it so elects.
56-AM. Recovery of arrears.— (1) Any sum
due to the Planning Authority under this Act or any rule
or regulation made thereunder, shall be the first charge
on the final plot on which it is due, subject to payment
of land revenue, if any, due to the Government thereon.
(2) Any sum due to the Planning Authority
under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder, which is not paid on demand, shall
be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
56-AN. Execution of works in the Scheme
area.— The appropriate Authority shall complete all the
works in the Scheme area within the period stipulated
in the Final Scheme :
Provided that the Government may, on a
request from the appropriate Authority, grant
further period of time not exceeding twice the
stipulated period for completion of the works.
56-AO. Cessation of application of the Local
Body Act.— (1) The Government may direct that any
power or function exercisable by a Local Authority
under a Local Body Act within a Scheme area shall stand
transferred to, and be performed by, the Planning
Authority under the said Act for such period and for
such purposes as may be notified, in relation to such
Scheme.



Page 50:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1129
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
Section,—
(a) “Local Authority" means,-
(i) any Municipality constituted
under the Puducherry Municipalities
Act, 1973 (No. 9 of 1973);
(ii) any commune Panchayat constituted
under the Puducheny Village and
Commune Panchayats Act, 1973
(No. 10 of 1973);
(2) After expiry of the period notified under
sub-section (1), all assets and facilities such as
public street, drinking water and sewerage
system, street light and such other facilities
created by the Planning Authority or the
Designated Officer in the Scheme area shall
stand vested with the Local Authority”.
26. In the principal Act, in section 61, “(1) In Amendment of
Section 61.
sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words “Senior Town
Planner”, the words “Chief Town Planner”, shall be
substituted; (2) In sub-section (2), for the words
“Development Plan”, the words “Master Plan”, shall be
substituted;
27. In the principal Act, in section 79, for the Amendment of
Section 79.
words “Senior Town Planner”, the words “Chief Town
Planner”, shall be substituted.
28. In the principal Act, in sub-section (2) of Amendment and
section 81, insertion of
Clause in section
81.
“(1) In clause (e), for the “Senior Town
Planner”, the words “Chief Town Planner” shall be
substituted;



Page 51:
Text:
1130 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(2) The existing clause (h) shall be substituted
with the following, namely:—
“the form and contents of the development
plan and the Scheme and procedure to be
followed in connection with the preparation,
submission and approval of such plans and the
form and the manner of publication of the
notices relating to such plans”;
(3) After the clause (i), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
(ia) the duties of the Designated Officer and
the manner of reconstitution of plots, allotment
of final plots, incorporation of the legal rights
settled in the final Scheme in the Land Registers
of the Revenue Department;
(ib) estimated cost of the scheme, financial
account for the Scheme such as, escrow
account, for the preparation, approval and
effective implementation of the Scheme;
(ic) the specification of particulars of works
or improvements relating to streets or roads
provided for in any development plan that have
to be made or carried out at the expense of the
Planning Authority, the owners of the property,
local body and other authorities;
(id) the procedure to be adopted by the
Planning Authority or any other Authority or
person, in cases where owners commit default
or delay in the carrying out of works or
improvements, for carrying out such works or
improvements and for recovering the cost from
the owners liable therefor;



Page 52:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1131
(ie) the procedure to be adopted for securing
cooperation on the part of the Planning
Authorities with the owners or persons
interested in property proposed to be comprised
in any development plan by such means as may
be expedient, the summoning, presiding and
procedure of such conferences and all such
matters.”
29. In the principal Act, after the section 81, the Insertion of
section 81 A.
following section shall be inserted, namely :-
“81 A. Notification.— All the Notifications
issued under this Act shall, unless they are expressed
to come into force on a particular day, come into force
on the day on which they are published.”
30 . (1) In Principal Act, in section 82, the section Amendment of
Section 82.
shall be numbered as sub-section (1);
(2) After the sub-section (1) the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The Government may, by notification,
rescind any regulation made under this section and
there upon, the regulation shall cease to have effect.”
————



Page 53:
Text:
1132 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
1. The Town and Country Planning Department has proposed to amend
the principal Act, (i.e.), The Puducherry Town and Country Planning Act, 1969
in a holistic manner to provide provisions for implementation of new planning
tool viz., Land Pooling Area Development Scheme (LPADS), Premium Floor
Area Ratio (PFAR), Transferable Developments Rights (TDR), Conservation
of Heritage buildings, and levy of Infrastructure and Amenities charges,
shelter charges and other charges as detailed below:
(a) Land Pooling Area Development Scheme (LPADS) : It is a Town
Planning Scheme, which pools together all the land under different ownerships
and redistributes it in a properly reconstituted form after deducting the land
required for open spaces, social infrastructures, services, housing for the
economically weaker section, and road network. This process enables the
Government and the Local Authority to develop land without fully acquiring
it and gives it a positive control over the design and the timing of the urban
growth. This method is extensively practiced in the site of Gujarat and
Maharashtra and is widely spreading throughout the Country. The
Government of India also promotes this Scheme.
(b) Transferable Development Rights (TOR) : Transferable
Development Rights (TDR) means an award specifying the Built-Up Area
(BUA) an owner of a site or plot can either sell or utilize - in-situ / elsewhere,
in lieu of the land foregone on account of surrendering / gifting land free of
cost to the Urban Local Bodies (Municipal Body, Planning Authority), required
to be set apart for public purpose as per the Master Plan or for road widening,
recreational use zone, etc. The Award is in the form of a TDR Certificate issued
by the Competent Authority (i.e.) the Planning Authority. The TDR Certificate
inter-alia shall mention the area surrendered and the cost of that area as per
the Guideline value rate. These Certificates are regulated under the building
Bye-Laws or in conjunction with TDR Guidelines framed by the Government
from time-to-time.
(c) Premium Floor Area Ratio (PFAR) : This involve levy of premium
charges for grant of additional Floor Area Ratio over and above the permissible
Floor Area Ratio in the areas identified for this purpose in the Zonal
Regulations of the Master Plan and to increase the resources of the Planning
Authorities.



Page 54:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1133
(d) Levy of infrastructure and amenities charges : Every Planning
Authority / Local Authority, while according building permit under this Act,
as the case may be, shall levy charges on the institution of use or change of
use of land or building or development of any land or building in the whole
area or any part of the Planning area so as to meet the impact of development
and for ensuring sustainable development of urban and rural areas by
providing adequate infrastructure and basic amenities at the rates as
determined in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed which
shall not be less than the minimum and not more than the maximum as may be
prescribed, and different rates may be prescribed for different parts of the
planning area and for different uses.
(2) Therefore, necessary definitions; posts; sections related to land
acquisition, purchase, adjustments; sections related to conservation and
protection of environment & heritage; provision for implementation of Land
Pooling Area Development Scheme, provision for premium Floor Area Ratio,
Transferable Development Rights; provisions for collection of Infrastructure
and Amenities charges, shelter charges, other charges, are proposed in a
holistic manner to the Principal Act, The Puducherry Town and Country
Planning Act, 1969.
(3) The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N. RANGASAMY,
Hon’ble Chief Minister-cum-Minister
(Town Planning).
————
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for permitting Additional Floor Area Ratio
over and above the ordinary Floor Area Ratio on payment of premium charges
by the proponent / Applicant as may be prescribed and for transfer of
development rights to the land owners who surrender land free of cost to the
Planning Authority required for public purpose and no expenditure is involved.



Page 55:
Text:
1134 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
2. Clause 24 (56-A) of the Bill provides for Levy of infrastructure and
Amenities charges by the Planning Authority while according building permit
to the promoters on the institution of use or change of use of land or building
or development of any land or building to mobilize additional resources to
meet the impact of development for providing adequate basic amenities and
infrastructure facilities.
3. Clause 24 (56-B) of the Bill provides for constitution of State
Infrastructure and Amenities Fund for crediting the infrastructure and
amenities charges collected by the Planning Authorities. This fund shall be
utilized for the purpose of providing adequate basic amenities and
infrastructure facilities to cope up with the development activities.
4. Clause 24 (56-C) of the Bill provides to levy shelter charges on the
institution of use or change of use of land or building or development of any
land or building in the whole area or any part of the planning area so as to
contribute towards cost of providing affordable housing to the poor in urban
areas and also clause 24 (56-D) of the Bill provides for constitution of shelter
fond, so as to credit the amount so collected for the purpose and to operate.
5. (i) Clause 25 in Chapter X-A of the Bill provides for implementation
of Land Pooling Area Development Scheme, wherein Land pooling or land
re-adjustment is a way of consolidating land for development of projects by
making land owners as partners in development. Land pooling is a unique
assembly strategy that has the advantage of no initial monetary outlay to
purchase the land. Whereas, in land acquisition, Government is exercising their
right to property for public purposes shall pay the land owners fair market
value of the land for acquiring their land.
(ii) Under land pooling, financial risks are pooled and shared between
the original property owners and redevelopment agencies in the pooling
mechanisms (i.e.), the burden is shifted to the land owners to contribute their
land in exchange for a participating interest in the value created by the
development project. Major benefits under the land pooling Scheme for the
land owners is : Increase in Value of land, Non-Displacing Strategy of land
assembly, conversion of irregular land parcels into plots of regular sizes and
shapes, Better Infrastructure. Similarly, the benefits for the Government,



Page 56:
Text:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 1135
through this land pooling Scheme is that final plot after reconstituted land is
handed over to the original owner(s) after deducting the cost of the provision
of infrastructure and public facilities by the sale of some of serviced land
under the Scheme. The land owners and development entity share in the risk
and return of the project. The cost recovery and land pays for the
infrastructure and other public facilities and no expenditure is involved.
6. This proposal shall generate more revenue to the Government of
Puducherry which can be utilized for the planned infrastructure development
of the Union territory of Puducherry.
————
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
The proposal is for effecting amendment to the principal Act (i.e.,)
The Puducherry Town and Country Planning Act, 1969 in a holistic manner
to provide provisions for implementation of new planning tool viz., Land
Pooling Area Development Scheme (LPADS), Premium Floor Area Ratio (PFAR),
Transferable Developments Rights (TDR), Conservation of Heritage buildings,
and levy of Infrastructure and Amenities charges, shelter charges and other
charges are matters in respect of which Notifications may be issued or rule
may be made, in accordance with the aforesaid provisions of the Bill and are
matters of procedure and detail.
2. The delegation of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
————
online publication at “https://styandptg.py.gov.in”
Published by the Director, Government Press, Puducherry.


