Page 1:
Text:
48 TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
BILLS INTRODUCED IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF
THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU
Under Rule 130 of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly Rules,
the following Bill which was introduced in the Legislative Assembly
of the Tamil Nadu on 16th April 2025 is published together with
Statement of Objects and Resasons for general information:-
L.A. Bill No. 9 of 2025
A Bill further to amend the Tamil Nadu Urban Local Bodies
Act, 1998.
Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Tamil Nadu in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Urban Local
commencement. Bodies (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the State
Government may, by notification, appoint.
Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Urban Local Bodies Act, 1998 Tamil Nadu Act 9
section 2. (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (27), the of 1999.
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(27-A) “person with disability” shall have the same meaning as
in the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016;”.
Amendment of 3. In section 37 of the principal Act,— Central Act 49
section 37. of 2016.
(1) in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(i-a) one person with disability to be nominated as a
member, by the Government in respect of municipal corporation and
by the Director in respect of municipal council and town panchayat,
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that two persons with disability shall be nominated as
members where the strength of the council exceeds one hundred.”;
(b) in the first proviso, for the expression “clauses (ii)”,
the expression “clauses (i-a), (ii)” shall be substituted;
(2) after sub-section (1-A), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(1-B) The qualifications for nomination as a member
under clause (i-a) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may be
prescribed.”;
(3) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(2-A) The term of office of the member nominated
under clause (i-a) of sub-section (1) shall be co-terminus with the
duration of the council.”.
Amendment of 4. Section 43-A of the principal Act shall be re-numbered
section 43-A. as section 43-B and in section 43-B as so re-numbered, in
sub-section (1), for the expression “clauses (ii)”, the expression
“clauses (i-a), (ii)” shall be substituted.
Insertion of new 5. Before section 43-B of the principal Act as so re-numbered,
section 43-A. the following section shall be inserted, namely:—



Page 2:
Text:
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 49
“43-A. Powers and duties of nominated member.— Amendment of
A member nominated under clause (i-a) of sub-section (1) of section section 48.
37 shall have such powers and duties as may be prescribed.”.
6. In section 48 of the principal Act,—
(1) in the marginal heading, for the expression “Deputy
Chairperson and councillor”, the expression “Deputy Chairperson,
councillor and nominated member” shall be substituted;
(2) in sub-section (1), for the expression “Deputy
Chairperson and the councillors”, the expression “Deputy
Chairperson, councillors and the member nominated under
clause (i-a) of sub-section (1) of section 37” shall be substituted;
(3) in sub-section (3), for the expression “Deputy
Chairperson or councillors”, the expression “Deputy Chairperson,
councillors or the member nominated under clause (i-a) of
sub-section (1) of section 37” shall be substituted.
7. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the Amendment of
expression “clauses (ii)”, the expression “clauses (i-a), (ii)” shall be section 50.
substituted.
8. In section 198 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of
section 198.
(1) in clause (xviii), the word “and” at the end shall be
omitted;
(2) for clause (xix), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(xix) as to the manner of nomination under clause (i-a) of
sub-section (1) of section 37;
(xx) as to the qualifications for nomination as a member
under sub-section (1-B) of section 37;
(xxi) as to the powers and duties of the nominated member
under section 43-A; and
(xxii) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed under this Act.”.



Page 3:
Text:
50 TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.
The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu has announced that action will be taken to nominate persons
with disabilities in all local bodies in the State to ensure that their voices are heard in local governance and that
they are empowered to take leadership roles in local administration. The above announcement paved the way
for achieving social justice by way of distribution of opportunities and privileges equally to all citizens including
the persons with disabilities. Accordingly, the Government have decided to nominate persons with disability in
all the town panchayats, municipal councils and municipal corporations by amending the Tamil Nadu Urban
Local Bodies Act, 1998 (Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1999) suitably.
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision.
K.N.NEHRU,
Minister for Municipal Administration.



Page 4:
Text:
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 51
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION.
Clauses 1(2), 3(1)(a), 3(2), 5 and 8(2) of the Bill authorise the Government to issue notification or to make
rules, as the case may be, for the purposes specified therein.
2. The powers delegated are normal and not of an exceptional character.
K.N.NEHRU,
Minister for Municipal Administration.
Secretariat, K. SRINIVASAN,
Chennai, Principal Secretary.
16th April 2025.


