Rights
In everyday life we often talk of our rights. As members of a democratic country we
may speak of such rights as the right to vote, the right to form political parties, the
right to contest elections and so on. But apart from the generally accepted political
and civil rights, people today are also making new demands for rights such as the
right to information, right to clean air or the right to safe drinking water. Rights are
claimed not only in relation to our political and public lives but also in relation to
our social and personal relationships. Moreover, rights may be claimed not only for
adult human beings but also for children, unborn foetuses, and even animals. The
notion of rights is thus invoked in a variety of different ways by different people. In
this chapter we will explore:
o
What do we mean when we speak of rights?
o
What is the basis on which rights are claimed?
o
What purpose do rights serve and, why are they so important?

5.1 WHAT ARE RIGHTS?
A right is essentially an entitlement or a justified claim. It denotes
what we are entitled to as citizens, as individuals and as human
beings. It is something that we consider to be due to us; something
that the rest of society must recognise as being a legitimate claim
that must be upheld. This does not mean that everything that I regard
to be necessary and desirable is a right. I may want to wear the
clothes of my choice to school rather than the prescribed uniform. I
may want to stay out late at night but this does not mean that I have
a right to dress in any way I like at school or to return home when I
choose to do so. There is a distinction between what I want and
think I am entitled to, and what can be designated as rights.
Rights are primarily those claims that I along with others regard
to be necessary for leading a life of respect and dignity. In fact, one
of the grounds on which rights have been claimed is that they
represent conditions that we collectively see as a source of self-
respect and dignity. For example, the right to livelihood may be
considered necessary for leading a life of dignity. Being gainfully
employed gives a person economic independence and thus is central
for his/her dignity.  Having our basic needs met gives us freedom
to pursue our talents and interests. Or, take the right to express
ourselves freely.  This right gives us the opportunity to be creative
and original, whether it be in writing, or dance, or music, or any
other creative activity. But freedom of expression is also important
for democratic government since it allows for the free expression of
beliefs and opinions. Rights such as the right to a livelihood, or
freedom of expression, would be important for all human beings
who live in society and they are described as universal in nature.
Another ground on which rights have been claimed is that they
are necessary for our well-being. They help individuals to develop
their talents and skills. A right like the right to education, for
instance, helps to develop our capacity to reason, gives us useful
skills and enables us to make informed choices in life. It is in this
sense that education can be designated as a universal right. 

Constitutions represent the highest law of the land and o constitutional recognition of certain rights gives them a primary 
those which are considered to be of basic importance. In some cases
these may be supplemented by claims which gain importance
because of the particular history and customs of a country. In India,
for instance, we have a provision to ban untouchability which draws
attention to a traditional social practice in the country.
So important is the legal and constitutional recognition of our
claims that several theorists define rights as claims that are
recognised by the state. The legal endorsement certainly gives our
rights a special status in society but it is not the basis on which
rights are claimed. As we discussed earlier, rights have steadily
been expanded and reinterpreted to include previously excluded
groups and to reflect our contemporary understanding of what it
means to lead a life of dignity and respect.
However, in most cases the claimed rights are directed towards
the state. That is, through these rights people make demands upon
the state. When I assert my right to education, I call upon the state
to make provisions for my basic education. Society may also accept
the importance of education and contribute to it on its own. Different
groups may open schools and fund scholarships so that children of
all classes can get the benefit of education. But the primary
responsibility rests upon the state. It is the state that must initiate
necessary steps to ensure that my right to education is fulfilled.
Thus, rights place an obligation upon the state to act in certain
kinds of ways. Each right indicates what the state must do as well
as what it must not do. For instance, my right to life obliges the
state to make laws that protect me from injury by others. It calls
upon the state to punish those who hurt me or harm me. If a society
feels that the right to life means a right to a good quality of life, it
expects the state to pursue policies that provide for clean
environment along with other conditions that may be necessary for
a healthy life. In other words, my right here places certain obligations
upon the state to act in a certain way.
Rights not only indicate what the state must do, they also suggest
what the state must refrain from doing. My right to liberty as a person,
for instance, suggests that the state cannot simply arrest me at its
own will. If it wishes to put me behind bars, it must defend that action;
produce an arrest warrant before taking me away. My
rights thus place certain constraints upon state actions.

In India the government has rece
means that no one
should be allowed to introduced a rural employment guarantee schedule to
make films that offend among other measures to help the poor.
Today, in addition to political and economic rituals,
cultural beliefs of
more and more democracies are recognising
others.

Which of the following rights granted to groups/
communities are justifiable? Discuss.
o Jain community in a town sets up its own school
and enrols students only from its own community.
o Purchase of land or property in Himachal Pradesh
is restricted to those who are residents in that
state.
o The principal of a co-ed college issued a circular
that no girl should wear any ‘western’ dress.

Protecting the ozone layer,
minimising air and water pollution, maintaining the green cover by
planting new trees and preventing cutting down of forests,
maintaining the ecological balance, are things that are essential for
all of us. They represent the ‘common-good’ that we must act to
protect for ourselves as well as for the future generations who are
entitled to inherit a safe and clean world without which they cannot
lead a reasonably good life.
Secondly, they require that I respect
the rights of others. If I say that I must
be given the right to express my views
must also grant the same right to
others. If I do not want others to
interfere in the choices I make — the
dress I wear or the music I listen to —
must refrain from interfering in the
choices that others make. I must leave
them free to choose their music and
clothes. I cannot use the right to free
speech to incite a crowd to kill my
neighbour. In exercising my rights, I
cannot deprive others of their rights.
My rights are, in other words, limited
by the principle of equal and same
rights for all.
Thirdly, we must balance our rights when they come into conflict.
Fourthly, citizens must be vigilant about limitations
which may be placed on their rights. A currently debated
topic concerns the increased restrictions which many
governments are imposing on the civil liberties of
citizens on the grounds of national security. Protecting
national security may be defended as necessary for
safeguarding the rights and well-being of citizens. But
at what point could the restrictions imposed as
necessary for security themselves become a threat to
the rights of people? Should a country facing the threat
of terrorist bombings be allowed to curtail the liberty
of citizens? Should it be allowed to arrest people on
mere suspicion? Should it be allowed to intercept their
mail or tap their phones? Should it be allowed to use
torture to extract confession?
In such situations the question to ask is whether
the person concerned poses an imminent threat to
society. Even arrested persons should be allowed legal
counsel and the opportunity to present their case before
a magistrate or a court of law. We need to be extremely
cautious about giving governments powers which could
be used to curtail the civil liberties of individuals for
such powers can be misused. Governments can become
authoritarian and undermine the very reasons for which
governments exist — namely, the well-being of the
members of the state. Hence, even though rights can
never be absolute, we need to be vigilant in protecting
our rights and those of others for they form the basis
of a democratic society.

LET’S DEBATE
“ ”
One man‘s rights end
where the other man‘s
nose begins. On 10 December 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations
adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Following this historic act the Assembly called upon all Member
countries to publicise the text of the Declaration and “to cause it to be
disseminated, displayed, read and expounded principally in schools
and other educational institutions, without distinction based on the
political status of countries or territories.”

PREAMBLE
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted
in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind,
and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom
of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been
proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have
recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression,
that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly
relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and
women and have determined to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in
co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms
is of the greatest importance for the full realisation of this pledge,
Now, therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end
that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this
Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education
to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive
measures, national and international, to secure their universal and
effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of
Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under
their jurisdiction.

PREAMBLE
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted
in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind,
and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom
of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been
proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have
recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression,
that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly
relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and
women and have determined to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in
co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms
is of the greatest importance for the full realisation of this pledge,
Now, therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end
that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this
Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education
to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive
measures, national and international, to secure their universal and
effective recognition and observance.