124
Chapter Six
JUDICIARY
INTRODUCTION
Many times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individuals
or private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciary
is an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact,
one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has
played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. In
this chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In the
chapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is very
important for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would be
able to understand
± the meaning of independence of judiciary;
± the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;
± the role of the Judiciary in interpreting the Constitution; and
± the relationship between the Judiciary and the Parliament of India.

table starts| implies that all individuals — rich and poor, men or women, forward
or backward castes — are subjected to the same law. The principal
role of the judiciary is to protect rule of law and ensure supremacy
of law. It safeguards rights of the individual, settles disputes in
accordance with the law and ensures that democracy does not give
way to individual or group
dictatorship. In order to be able to do
all this, it is necessary that the
R
judiciary is independent of any EAD A CARTOON
political pressures.
What is meant by an independent
judiciary? How is this independence
ensured?
Independence of Judiciary
Simply stated independence of
judiciary means that
± the other organs of the government
like the executive and legislature
must not restrain the functioning
of the judiciary in such a way that
it is unable to do justice.
± the other organs of the government
should not interfere with the
decision of the judiciary.
± judges must be able to perform
their functions without fear or
favour.
Independence of the judiciary does
not imply arbitrariness or absence of |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |
|  | R EAD A | CARTOON |  |
| accountability. Judiciary is a part of the democratic political structure of the No fisticuffs please | No fisticuffs please | , this is rule of law! |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary

table starts|  | Indian Constitution at Work
country. It is therefore accountable to the Constitution,
to the democratic traditions and to the people of the
country.
How can the independence of judiciary be provided
and protected? |
| --- | --- |
| I remember the case mentioned in cha Don’t they say, ‘jus is justice denied’? should do someth this. |  |

table ends


table starts| giving their rulings? Do you think these are
justified?
± Constitution
± Precedents
± Opinion of other courts
± Public opinion
± Media
± Traditions of law
± Laws
± Time and staff constraints
± Fear of public criticism
± Fear of action by executive
Appointment of Judges
The appointment of judges has never been free from
political controversy. It is part of the political process. It
makes a difference who serves in the Supreme Court and
High Court— a difference in how the Constitution is
interpreted. The political philosophy of the judges, their
views about active and assertive judiciary or controlled
and committed judiciary have an impact on the fate of the
legislations enacted. Council of Ministers, Governors and
Chief Ministers and Chief Justice of India — all influence
the process of judicial appointment.
As far as the appointment of the Chief Justice of India
(CJI) is concerned, over the years, a convention had I am afraid, I am getti
developed whereby the senior-most judge of the Supreme confused. In a democracy, y
Court was appointed as the Chief Justice of India. This can criticise the Prime Minis
convention was however broken twice. In 1973 A. N. Ray or even the President, but
was appointed as CJI superseding three senior Judges. the judges! And what is t |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | I am afraid, I am getti confused. In a democracy, y can criticise the Prime Minis or even the President, but the judges! And what is t |  |
| Again, Justice M.H. Beg was appointed superseding Justice H.R. Khanna (1975). |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary

table starts|  | The other Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Court are appointed by the President after ‘consulting’
the CJI. This, in effect, meant that the final decisions in
matters of appointment rested with the Council of
Ministers. What then, was the status of the consultation |
| --- | --- |
| But I think, finally of Ministers would say in appointing j it that the judiciar appointing body? |  |

table ends

Removal of Judges
The removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the Supreme
Court or High Court can be removed only on the ground
of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion
containing the charges against the judge must be
approved by special majority in both Houses of the
Parliament. Do you remember what special majority
means? We have studied this in the chapter on Elections.
It is clear from this procedure that removal of a judge is a
very difficult procedure and unless there is a general
consensus among Members of the Parliament, a judge
cannot be removed. It should also be noted that while in
making appointments, the executive plays a crucial role;
the legislature has the powers of removal. This has ensured

Chapter 6: Judiciary
both balance of power and independence of the judiciary. So far,
only one case of removal of a judge of the Supreme Court came up
for consideration before Parliament. In that case, though the motion
got two-thirds majority, it did not have the support of the majority of
the total strength of the House and therefore, the judge was not
removed.
Unsuccessful Attempt to Remove a Judge
In 1991 the first-ever motion to remove a Supreme Court
Justice was signed by 108 members of Parliament. Justice
V. Ramaswami, during his tenure as the Chief Justice of
the Punjab and Haryana High Court was accused of
misappropriating funds. In 1992, a year after Parliament
had started the removal proceedings, a high-profile inquiry
commission consisting of Judges of the Supreme Court
found Justice V. Ramaswami “guilty of wilful and gross
misuses of office . . . and moral turpitude by using public
funds for private purposes and reckless disregard of
statutory rules” while serving as the Chief Justice of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court. Despite this strong
indictment, Ramaswami survived the parliamentary
motion 
recommending 
removal. 
The 
motion
recommending his removal got the required two-thirds
majority among the members who were present and voting,
but the Congress party abstained from voting in the
House. Therefore, the motion could not get the support of
one-half of the total strength of the House.
Check your progress
±
Why is independence of the judiciary
important?
±
Do you think that executive should have
the power to appoint judges?
±
If you were asked to make suggestions
for changing the procedure of appointing
judges, what changes would you
suggest?

table starts| top, High Courts below them and district and subordinate courts at
the lowest level (see the diagram below). The lower courts function
under the direct superintendence of the higher courts.
Supreme Court of India
± Its decisions are binding on all courts.
± Can transfer Judges of High Courts.
± Can move cases from any court to itself.
± Can transfer cases from one High Court to
another.
High Court
± Can hear appeals from lower courts.
± Can issue writs for restoring Fundamental
Rights.
± Can deal with cases within the
jurisdiction of the State.
± Exercises superintendence and control
over courts below it.
District Court
± Deals with cases arising in the
District.
± Considers appeals on decisions
given by lower courts.
± Decides cases involving serious
criminal offences.
Subordinate Courts
± Consider cases of
civil and criminal
130
nature |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Subordinate Courts ± Consider cases of civil and criminal nature |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends


Chapter 6: Judiciary
Jurisdiction of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of India is one of the very powerful courts
anywhere in the world. However, it functions within the limitations
imposed by the Constitution. The functions and responsibilities of
the Supreme Court are defined by the Constitution. The Supreme
Court has specific jurisdiction or scope of powers.
Jurisdiction
of Supreme
Court
of India
Original
Settles
disputes
between
Union and
States and
amongst
States.
Appellate
Tries appeals
from lower
courts in Civil,
Criminal and
Constitutional
cases
Advisory
Advises the
President on
matters of
public
importance
and law
Writ:
Can issue writs of
Habeas Corpus,
Mandamus, Prohibition,
Certiorari and Quo
warranto to protect the
Fundamental Rights of the
individual.
Special Powers
Can grant special leave to an appeal from any judgement or
matter passed by any court in the territory of India.

Original Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction means cases that can be directly considered by
the Supreme Court without going to the lower courts before that.
From the diagram above, you will notice that cases involving federal
relations go directly to the Supreme Court. The Original Jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court establishes it as an umpire in all disputes
regarding federal matters.  In any federal country, legal disputes are
bound to arise between the Union and the States; and among the
States themselves. The power to resolve such cases is entrusted to
the Supreme Court of India. It is called original jurisdiction because
the Supreme Court alone has the power to deal with such cases.
Neither the High Courts nor the lower courts can deal with such
cases. In this capacity, the Supreme Court not just settles disputes
but also interprets the powers of Union and State government as
laid down in the Constitution.
Writ Jurisdiction
As you have already studied in the chapter on fundamental rights,
any individual, whose fundamental right has been violated, can
directly move the Supreme Court for remedy. The Supreme Court
can give special orders in the form of writs. The High Courts can also
issue writs, but the persons whose rights are violated have the choice
of either approaching the High Court or approaching the Supreme
Court directly. Through such writs, the Court can give orders to the
executive to act or not to act in a particular way.
Appellate Jurisdiction
The Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal. A person can
appeal to the Supreme Court against the decisions of the High Court.
However, High Court must certify that the case is fit for appeal, that
is to say that it involves a serious matter of interpretation of law or
Constitution. In addition, in criminal cases, if the lower court has
sentenced a person to death then an appeal can be made to the High
Court or Supreme Court. Of course, the Supreme Court holds the
powers to decide whether to admit appeals even when appeal is not
allowed by the High Court. Appellate jurisdiction means that the
Supreme Court will reconsider the case and the legal issues involved

table starts| The High Courts too, have appellate jurisdiction over
the decisions given by courts below them.
Advisory Jurisdiction
In addition to original and appellate jurisdiction, the
Supreme Court of India possesses advisory jurisdiction
also. This means that the President of India can refer any
matter that is of public importance or that which involves
interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice.
However, the Supreme Court is not bound to give advice
on such matters and the President is not bound to accept
such an advice.
What then is the utility of the advisory powers of the
Supreme Court? The utility is two-fold. In the first place,
it allows the government to seek legal opinion on a matter
of importance before taking action on it. This may prevent
unnecessary litigations later. Secondly, in the light of the
advice of the Supreme Court, the government can make
suitable changes in its action or legislations.
Article 137
…….. the Supreme Court shall
have power to review any
judgment pronounced or order
made by it.
Article 144
…… All authorities, civil and Isn’t it funny that giving adv
judicial, in the territory of India is optional and accepting t |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Isn’t it funny that giving adv is optional and accepting t |  |
| shall act in aid of the Supreme Court. |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary

table starts|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | throughout the length and breadth of the country. The Supreme Court itself is not bound by its decision and |
|  | can at any time review it. Besides, if there is a case of contempt of the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court |
| Why is the Supreme Court allowed to change its own ruling? Is it because courts can also make mistakes? Is it possible that the same judge is part of the ‘Bench’ that revises the ruling and was also on the Bench that gave the ruling in the first place? |  |

table ends

Appeal from District
court of Haryana
will go to
Single Integrated
Judiciary
  
Declaring a law
unconstitutional
JUDICIAL ACTIVISM
Have you heard of the term judicial activism? Or, Public
Interest Litigation?
Both these terms are often used in the discussions
about judiciary in recent times. Many people think that
these two things have revolutionised the functioning of
judiciary and made it more people-friendly.
Judicial review
Original Jurisdiction
Supreme Court
Single Constitution

table starts|  | R
EAD A CARTOON | Irfan
13 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Do you know that in recent times the judiciary has ruled that bandhs and hartals are illegal? The chief instrument through which judicial activism has flourished in India is Public Interest Litigation (PIL) or Social Action Litigation (SAL). What is PIL or SAL? How and when did it emerge? In normal course of law, an individual can approach the courts only if he/she has been personally aggrieved. That is to say, a person whose rights have been violated, or who is involved in a dispute, could move the court of law. This concept underwent a change around 1979. In 1979, the Court set the trend when it decided to hear a case where the case was filed not by the aggrieved persons but by others on their behalf. As this case involved a consideration of an issue of public interest, it and such other cases came to be known as public interest litigations. Around the same time, the Supreme Court also took up the case about rights of prisoners. This |  |  |
|  | Do you know that in recent times the judiciary has ruled that bandhs and hartals are illegal? |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary

table starts|  |  | protection of the environment, and many other issues in
the interest of the public. PIL has become the most
important vehicle of judicial activism.
Judiciary, which is an institution that traditionally
confined to responding to cases brought before it, began |
| --- | --- | --- |
| considering many cases merely on the basis of newspaper reports and postal complaints received by the court. Therefore, the term judicial activism became the more popular description of the role of the judiciary. Some Early PILs I have heard someone say that ± In 1979, newspapers published reports about PIL means ‘private interest ‘under trials’. There were many prisoners in litigation’. Why would that Bihar who had spent long years in jail, longer be so? than what they would have spent if they had been punished for the offences for which they were arrested. This report prompted an advocate to file a petition. The Supreme Court heard this case. It became famous as one of the early Public Interest Litigations (PILs). This was the Hussainara Khatoon vs. Bihar case. ± In 1980, a prison inmate of the Tihar jail managed to send a scribbled piece of paper to Justice Krishna Iyer of the Supreme Court narrating physical torture of the prisoners. The judge got it converted into a petition. Though later on, the Court abandoned the practice of considering letters, this case, known as Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration (1980) also became one of the pioneers of public interest litigation. Through the PIL, the court has expanded the idea of rights. Clean air, unpolluted water, decent living, etc., are rights for the entire society. Therefore, it was felt by the courts that individuals as parts of the society must have 136 the right to seek justice wherever such rights were violated. | I have heard someone say that PIL means ‘private interest litigation’. Why would that be so? |  |

table ends


table starts| It must be remembered that the problems of
the poor …are qualitatively different from those which
have hitherto occupied the attention of the Court and
they need ….a different kind of judicial approach. If
we blindly follow the adversarial procedure in their
case, they would never be able to enforce their
fundamental rights. — Justice Bhagwati in Bandhua
Mukti Morcha vs. Union of India, 1984.
Activity
Find out the details about at least
one case involving a PIL and study
the way in which that case helped
in serving public interest.
Judicial activism has had manifold impact on the
political system. It has democratised the judicial system
by giving not just to individuals but also groups access
to the courts. It has forced executive accountability. It
has also made an attempt to make the electoral system
much more free and fair. The court asked candidates
contesting elections to file affidavits indicating their assets
and income along with educational qualifications so that
the people could elect their representatives based on
accurate knowledge.
There is however a negative side to the large number
of PILs and the idea of a proactive judiciary. In the first I think judicial activism is m
place it has overburdened the courts. Secondly, judicial about telling the legislature a
the executive what they sho
activism has blurred the line of distinction between the |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | I think judicial activism is m about telling the legislature a the executive what they sho |  |
| executive and legislature on the one hand and the judiciary on the other. The court has been involved in resolving questions which belong to the executive. Thus, for |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary
cannot easily approach the courts. For this purpose, the
judiciary allowed public spirited citizens, social
organisations and lawyers to file petitions on behalf of the
needy and the deprived.

instance, reducing air or sound pollution or investigating cases of
corruption or bringing about electoral reform is not exactly the duty
of the Judiciary. These are matters to be handled by the
administration under the supervision of the legislatures. Therefore,
some people feel that judicial activism has made the balance among
the three organs of government very delicate. Democratic government
is based on each organ of government respecting the powers and
jurisdiction of the others. Judicial activism may be creating strains
on this democratic principle.
JUDICIARY AND RIGHTS
We have already seen that the judiciary is entrusted with the task of
protecting rights of individuals. The Constitution provides two ways
in which the Supreme Court can remedy the violation of rights.
±
First it can restore fundamental rights by issuing writs of Habeas
Corpus; mandamus etc. (article 32). The High Courts also have
the power to issue such writs (article 226).
±
Secondly, the Supreme Court can declare the concerned law as
unconstitutional and therefore non-operational (article 13).
YOU ARE THE JUDGE
A group of citizens from a city have
approached the court through a PIL
asking for an order to the city municipal
authorities to remove slums and
beautify the city in order to attract
investors to the city. They argue that
this is in the ‘public interest.’ The
residents of the slum localities have
responded by saying that this will
encroach on their right to life. They
argue that right to life is more central
to ‘public interest’ than the right to a
clean city.
Imagine that you are the judge.
Write a judgement deciding if the PIL involves ‘public interest’.

table starts| Court is the power of judicial review. Judicial Review
means the power of the Supreme Court (or High Courts)
to examine the constitutionality of any law if the Court
arrives at the conclusion that the law is inconsistent with
the provisions of the Constitution, such a law is declared
as unconstitutional and inapplicable. The term judicial
review is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution. However,
the fact that India has a written constitution and the
Supreme Court can strike down a law that goes against
fundamental rights, implicitly gives the Supreme Court
the power of judicial review.
Besides, as we saw in the section on jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, in the case of federal relations too, the
Supreme Court can use the review powers if a law is
inconsistent with the distribution of powers laid down by
the Constitution. Suppose, the central government makes
a law, which according to some States, concerns a subject
from the State list. Then the States can go to the Supreme
Court and if the court agrees with them, it would declare
that the law is unconstitutional. In this sense, the review
power of the Supreme Court includes power to review
legislations on the ground that they violate fundamental
rights or on the ground that they violate the federal
distribution of powers. The review power extends to the
laws passed by State legislatures also.
Together, the writ powers and the review power of the
Court make judiciary very powerful. In particular, the
review power means that the judiciary can interpret the
Constitution and the laws passed by the legislature. Many
people think that this feature enables the judiciary to I think I’d rather becom
protect the Constitution effectively and also to protect the judge! Then, I won’t have |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | I think I’d rather becom judge! Then, I won’t have |  |
| rights of citizens. The practice of entertaining PILs has further added to the powers of the judiciary in protecting rights of citizens. |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary

Do you remember that in the chapter on rights we mentioned the
right against exploitation? This right prohibits forced labour, trade
in human flesh and prohibits employment of children in hazardous
jobs. But the question is: how could those, whose rights were violated,
approach the court? PIL and judicial activism made it possible for
courts to consider these violations. Thus, the court considered a whole
set of cases: the blinding of the jail inmates by the police, inhuman
working conditions in stone quarries, sexual exploitation of children,
and so on. This trend has made rights really meaningful for the poor
and disadvantaged sections.
Did you know that the practice of public interest litigation is now
becoming more and more acceptable in many other countries?
While many courts across the world, particularly in South Asia
and Africa practice some form of judicial activism comparable to
that of the Indian judiciary, the constitution of South Africa has
incorporated public interest litigation in its bill of rights. Thus,
in South Africa, it is a fundamental right of the citizen to bring
before the Constitutional Court, cases of violation of other persons’
rights.
Check your progress
±
When does the Court use the review powers?
±
What is the difference between judicial review
and writ?
JUDICIARY AND PARLIAMENT
Apart from taking a very active stand on the matter of rights, the
court has been active in seeking to prevent subversion of the
Constitution through political practice. Thus, areas that were
considered beyond the scope of judicial review such as powers of the
President and Governor were brought under the purview of the
courts.

Chapter 6: Judiciary
There are many other instances in which the Supreme Court
actively involved itself in the administration of justice by giving
directions to executive agencies. Thus, it gave directions to CBI to
initiate investigations against politicians and bureaucrats in the
hawala case, the Narasimha Rao case, illegal allotment of petrol
pumps case etc. You may have heard about some of these cases.
Many of these instances are the products of judicial activism.
The Indian Constitution is based on a delicate principle of limited
separation of powers and checks and balances. This means that each
organ of the government has a clear area of functioning. Thus, the
Parliament is supreme in making laws and amending the
Constitution, the executive is supreme in implementing them while
the judiciary is supreme in settling disputes and deciding whether
the laws that have been made are in accordance with the provisions
of the Constitution. Despite such clear cut division of power the
conflict between the Parliament and judiciary, and executive and
the judiciary has remained a recurrent theme in Indian politics.
We have already mentioned the differences that emerged between
the Parliament and the judiciary over right to property and the
Parliament’s power to amend the Constitution. Let us recapitulate
that briefly:
Immediately after the implementation of the Constitution began,
a controversy arose over the Parliament’s power to restrict right to
property. The Parliament wanted to put some restrictions on the
right to hold property so that land reforms could be implemented.
The Court held that the Parliament cannot thus restrict fundamental
rights. The Parliament then tried to amend the Constitution. But the
Court said that even through an amendment, a fundamental right
cannot be abridged.
The following issues were at the centre of the controversy between
the Parliament and the judiciary.
±
What is the scope of right to private property?
±
What is the scope of the Parliament’s power to curtail, abridge or
abrogate fundamental rights?
±
What is the scope of the Parliament’s power to amend the
constitution?
±
Can the Parliament make laws that abridge fundamental rights
while enforcing directive principles?

During the period 1967 and 1973, this controversy became very
serious. Apart from land reform laws, laws enforcing preventive
detention, laws governing reservations in jobs, regulations acquiring
private property for public purposes, and laws deciding the
compensation for such acquisition of private property were some
instances of the conflict between the legislature and the judiciary.
In 1973, the Supreme Court gave a decision that has become
very important in regulating the relations between the Parliament
and the Judiciary since then. This case is famous as the Kesavananda
Bharati case. In this case, the Court ruled that there is a basic
structure of the Constitution and nobody—not even the Parliament
(through amendment)—can violate the basic structure. The Court
did two more things. First, it said that right to property (the disputed
issue) was not part of basic structure and therefore could be suitably
abridged. Secondly, the Court reserved to itself the right to decide
whether various matters are part of the basic structure of the
Constitution. This case is perhaps the best example of how judiciary
uses its power to interpret the Constitution.
This ruling has changed the nature of conflicts between the
legislature and the judiciary. As we studied earlier, the right to
property was taken away from the list of fundamental rights in 1979
“While there can be no two opinions
on the need for the maintenance of
judicial independence, ...it is also
necessary to keep in view one
important principle. The doctrine of
independence is not to be raised to
the level of a dogma so as to enable
the judiciary to function as a kind
of super-legislature or super -
executive. The judiciary is there to
interpret the Constitution or
adjudicate upon the rights...”
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 837, 23 November 1949

table starts| Why can’t the Court tell us o
and for all what are th
aspects that are ‘basic structu
of the Constitution? | nce
ose
re’ |
| --- | --- |

table ends

Chapter 6: Judiciary
and this also helped in changing the nature of the
relationship between these two organs of government.
Some issues still remain a bone of contention between
the two — can the judiciary intervene in and regulate the
functioning of the legislatures? In the parliamentary
system, the legislature has the power to govern itself and
regulate the behaviour of its members. Thus, the
legislature can punish a person who the legislature holds
guilty of breaching privileges of the legislature. Can a
person who is held guilty for breach of parliamentary
privileges seek protection of the courts? Can a member of
the legislature against whom the legislature has taken
disciplinary action get protection from the court? These
issues are unresolved and are matters of potential conflict
between the two. Similarly, the Constitution provides that
the conduct of judges cannot be discussed in the
Parliament. There have been several instances where the
Parliament and State legislatures have cast aspersions
on the functioning of the judiciary. Similarly, the judiciary
too has criticised the legislatures and issued instructions
to the legislatures about the conduct of legislative
business. The legislatures see this as violating the principle
of parliamentary sovereignty.
These issues indicate how delicate the balance between
any two organs of the government is and how important
it is for each organ of the government in a democracy to
respect the authority of others.
Check your progress
The main issues in the conflict between
the judiciary and the Parliament have
been:
±
Appointment of judges
±
Salaries and allowances of judges
±
Scope of Parliament’s power to
amend the Constitution
±
Interference by the Parliament in
the functioning of the judiciary

table starts|  |  | democratic structure. In spite of
the tensions that arose from time
RTOON |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | R EAD A CA | RTOON |
| to time between the judiciary and the executive and the legislature, the prestige of the judiciary has increased considerably. At the same time, there are many more expectations from the judiciary. Ordinary citizens also wonder how it is possible for many people to get easy acquittals and how witnesses change their testimonies to suit the wealthy and the mighty. These are some issues about which our judiciary is concerned too. You have seen in this chapter that judiciary in India is a very powerful institution. This power has generated much awe and many hopes from it. Judiciary in India is also known for its independence. Through various decisions, the judiciary has given new interpretations to the Constitution and protected the How active is the judiciary in trying to rights of citizens. As we saw in curb corruption in public life? this chapter, democracy hinges on the delicate balance of power between the judiciary and the Parliament and both institutions have to function within the limitations set by the 144 Constitution. |  |  |
|  | How active is the judi curb corruption in pu | ciary in trying to blic life? |
|  |  |  |

table ends


Chapter 6: Judiciary