CONSTITUTION AS A LIVING DOCUMENT

The Soviet Union had four
underwent continuous
constitutions in its life of 74 years (1918, experimentation about a
1924, 1936 and 1977). In 1991, the rule constitution: The post-
of the Communist Party of Soviet Union revolution constitution of
came to an end and soon the Soviet 1793 is called the
federation disintegrated. After this political period of the first
upheaval, the newly formed Russian French republic. Then
federation adopted a new constitution in commenced the second
1993. French republic in 1848.
The third French republic
But look at India. The Constitution of
was formed with a new
India was adopted on 26 November 1949.
constitution in 1875. In
Its implementation formally started
1946, with a new
from 26 January 1950. More than
constitution, the fourth
69 years after that, the same constitution
French republic came into
continues to function as the framework
being. Finally, in 1958, the
within which the government of our
fifth French republic
country operates.
came into being with yet
Is it that our Constitution is so good another constitution.
that it needs no change? Was it that our
Constitution makers were so farsighted
and wise that they had foreseen all the
changes that would take place in the
future? In some sense both the answers
are correct. It is true that we have inherited
a very robust Constitution. The basic
framework of the Constitution is very
much suited to our country. It is also true
that the Constitution makers were very
farsighted and provided for many
solutions for future situations. 



Then how does the same Constitution continue to
serve the country? One of the answers to such questions
is that our Constitution accepts the necessity of
modifications according to changing needs of the society.
Secondly, in the actual working of the Constitution, there
has been enough flexibility of interpretations. Both
political practice and judicial rulings have shown maturity
and flexibility in implementing the Constitution. These
factors have made our Constitution a living document
rather than a closed and static rulebook.
In any society, those responsible for drafting the
constitution at a particular time would face one common
challenge: the provisions of the constitution would
naturally reflect efforts to tackle the problems that the
society is facing at the time of making of the constitution.
At the same time, the constitution must be a document
that provides the framework of the government for the
future as well. Therefore, the constitution has to be able
to respond to the challenges that may arise in the future.
In this sense, the constitution will always have something
that is contemporary and something that has a more
durable importance.


At the same time, a constitution is not a frozen and
unalterable document. It is a document made by human
beings and may need revisions, changes and re-
examination. It is true that the constitution reflects the
dreams and aspirations of the concerned society. It must
also be kept in mind that the constitution is a framework
for the democratic governance of the society. In this sense,
it is an instrument that societies create for themselves.
This dual role of the constitution always leads to
difficult questions about the status of the constitution: is
it so sacred that nobody ever can change it? Alternatively,
is it so ordinary an instrument that it can be modified
just like any other ordinary law?
The makers of the Indian Constitution were aware of
this problem and sought to strike a balance. They placed
the Constitution above ordinary law and expected that



At the same time,
they recognised that in the future, this document may require
modifications. Even at the time of writing the Constitution, they were
aware that on many matters there were differences of opinion.
Whenever society would veer toward any particular opinion, a change
in the constitutional provisions would be required. Thus, the Indian
Constitution is a combination of both the approaches mentioned
above: that the constitution is a sacred document and that it is an
instrument that may require changes from time to time.  In other
words, our Constitution is not a static document, it is not the final
word about everything; it is not unalterable.
Check your progress
After reading the section above, a number of
students in the class were confused. They made the
following statements. What would you say about
each of these statements?
±
The Constitution is like any other law. It simply
tells us what are the rules and regulations
governing the government.
±
The  Constitution is the expression of the will of
the people, so there must be a provision to change
the Constitution after every ten or fifteen years.
±
The  Constitution is a statement of the philosophy
of the country. It can never be changed.
±
The  Constitution is a sacred document.
Therefore any talk of changing it is against
democracy.


HOW TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION?
Article 368:
…Parliament may in exercise of
its constituent power amend by
way of addition, variation or
repeal any provision of this
Constitution in accordance with
the procedure laid down in this
article.

We have already seen that the makers of our
Constitution wanted to strike a balance. The Constitution
must be amended if so required. But it must be protected
from unnecessary and frequent changes. In other words,
they wanted the Constitution to be ‘flexible’ and at the
same time ‘rigid’. Flexible means open to changes and
rigid means resistant to changes. A constitution that can
be very easily changed or modified is often called flexible.
In the case of constitutions, which are very difficult
to amend, they are described as rigid. The Indian
Constitution combines both these characteristics.
The makers of the Constitution were aware of the fact
that there may be some faults or mistakes in the
Constitution; they knew that the Constitution could not
be totally free of errors. Whenever such mistakes would
come to light, they wanted the Constitution to be easily
amended and to be able to get rid of these mistakes. Then
there were some provisions in the Constitution that were
of temporary nature and it was decided that these could
be altered later on once the new Parliament was elected.
But at the same time, the Constitution was framing a
federal polity and therefore, the rights and powers of the
States could not be changed without the consent of the
States. Some other features were so central to the spirit of
the Constitution that the Constitution makers were
anxious to protect these from change. These provisions
had to be made rigid. These considerations led to different
ways of amending the Constitution.
I don’t understand how a
constitution can be flexible or
rigid. Isn’t it the politics of that
period which makes the
constitution rigid or flexible?
How to amend the
Constitution
Similar to ordinary
law: simple majority
in Parliament: as
mentioned in some
articles
Special majority in
Parliament in both
Houses separately:
as per article 368
Special majority
+
Legislatures of half
the states: article
368



Our Constitution avoids these complications. This
makes the amendment procedure relatively simple. But more
importantly, this process underlines an important principle: only
elected representatives of the people are empowered to consider and
take final decisions on the question of amendments. Thus, sovereignty
of elected representatives (parliamentary sovereignty) is the basis of
the amendment procedure.


Special Majority
In the chapters on Election, Executive and Judiciary, we have come
across provisions that require ‘special majority’. Ordinarily, all business of the legislature
requires that a motion or resolution or bill should get the support of
a simple majority of the members voting at that time. Suppose that
at the time of voting on a bill, 247 members were present in the
house and all of them participated in the voting on the bill. Then, the
bill would be passed if at least 124 members voted in favour of the
bill. Not so in the case of an amendment bill. Amendment to the
Constitution requires two different kinds of special majorities: in the
first place, those voting in favour of the amendment bill should
constitute at least half of the total strength of that House. Secondly,
the supporters of the amendment bill must also constitute two-thirds
of those who actually take part in voting. Both Houses of the
Parliament must pass the amendment bill separately in this same
manner (there is no provision for a joint session). For every amendment
bill, this special majority is required.
Can you see the significance of this requirement? In the Lok Sabha
there are 545 members. Therefore, any amendment must be
supported by a minimum of 273 members. Even if only 300 members
are present at the time of voting, the amendment bill must get the
support of 273 out of them. But imagine that 400 members of Lok
Sabha have voted on an amendment bill. How many members should
support the bill to get the bill passed?
In addition to this, both the Houses must pass the amendment
bill (with special majorities) separately. In Switzerland, people can even
initiate an amendment. Other examples of
countries where people initiate or approve
amendment to the constitution are Russia and
Italy, among others.
is sufficient consensus over the proposed amendment, it I am fed up with this business
cannot be passed. If the party in power enjoys very thin special majority. It forces you
majority, it can pass legislation of its choice and can get make difficult calculations all
budget approved even if the opposition does not agree. time. Is it politics or maths?
But it would need to take at least some opposition parties
into confidence, if it wanted to amend the Constitution.
So, the basic principle behind the amending procedure is
“If those who are dissatisfied with the
Constitution have only to obtain a 2/3 majority
and if they cannot obtain even (that)..., their
dissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot be
deemed to be shared by the general public.”
Note that Dr. Ambedkar is talking here not only
of parliamentary majority. He refers to ‘sharing
(of the views) by the general public’.



Ratification by States
For some articles of the Constitution, special majority is not
sufficient. When an amendment aims to modify an article related to
distribution of powers between the States and the central
government, or articles related to representation, it is necessary
that the States must be consulted and that they give their consent.
We have studied the federal nature of the Constitution. Federalism
means that powers of the States must not be at the mercy of the
central government. The Constitution has ensured this by providing
that legislatures of half the States have to pass the amendment bill
before the amendment comes into effect. We can say that for some
parts of the Constitution, greater or wider consensus in the polity
is expected. This provision also respects the States and gives them
participation in the process of amendment. At the same time, care
is taken to keep this procedure somewhat flexible even in its more
rigid format: consent of only half the States is required and simple
majority of the State legislature is sufficient. Thus, the amendment
process is not impracticable even after taking into consideration
this more stringent condition.
We may summarise that the Constitution of India can be amended
through large-scale consensus and limited participation of the States.
The founding fathers took care that Constitution would not be open
to easy tampering. And yet, future generations were given the right
to amend and modify according to the needs and requirements of
the time.



On 26 January 2024, the Constitution of India completed
74 years of its existence. In these years, it has been
amended 106 times. Given the relatively difficult method
of amending the Constitution, the number of amendments
appears quite high. Let us try to find out how it is that so
many amendments took place and what it means.
Let us first look at the brief history of the amendments:
look carefully at the graphs below. The same information
is presented in two different ways. The first graph depicts
the number of constitution amendments made every ten
years; the bar indicates the number of amendments in
that period. The second graph depicts the time taken for
every ten amendments; the bar depicts the years taken
for ten amendments. You will notice that the two decades
from 1970 to 1990 saw a large number of amendments.
On the other hand, the second graph tells one more story:
ten amendments took place between a short span of three
Why was our Constitution
amended so many times? Is there
something wrong with our society
or with the Constitution?
Subject of amendment
Special
Ratification
majority
by States
Citizenship clause
Right to freedom
of religion
Changes in the
Union List
Changes in State
boundaries
Provision regarding
Election Commission



Barring the first decade after the
commencement of the Constitution, every decade has
witnessed a steady stream of amendments. This means
that irrespective of the nature of politics and the party in
power, amendments were required to be made from time
to time. Was this because of the inadequacies of the
original Constitution? Is the Constitution too flexible?
Contents of Amendments made so far
Amendments made so far may be classified in three
groups. In the first group there are amendments, which
are of a technical or administrative nature and were only
clarifications, explanations, and minor modifications etc.
of the original provisions. They are amendments only in
the legal sense, but in matter of fact, they made no
substantial difference to the provisions.
This is true of the amendment that increased the age
of retirement of High Court judges from 60 to 62 years
(15th amendment). Similarly, salaries of judges of High
Courts and the Supreme Court were increased by an
amendment (54th amendment).
We may also take the example of the provision
regarding reserved seats in the legislatures for scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes. The original provision said
that these reservations were for a period of ten years.
However, in order to ensure fair representation of these
sections, it was necessary to extend this period by ten
years.



Do you remember the discussion in chapter four about
the role of the President? In the original Constitution, it
was assumed that in our parliamentary government, the
President would normally abide by the advice of the
Council of Ministers. This was only reiterated by a later
amendment when Article 74 (1) was amended to clarify
that the advice of the Council of Ministers will be binding
on the President (President shall act in accordance with
the advice of the Council of Ministers). In reality, this
amendment did not make any difference because, that is
exactly what has been happening all through. The
amendment was only by way of explanation.
Differing Interpretations
A number of amendments are a product of different
interpretations of the Constitution given by the judiciary
and the government of the day. When these clashed, the
Parliament had to insert an amendment underlining one
particular interpretation as the authentic one. It is part of
the democratic politics that various institutions would
interpret the Constitution and particularly the scope of
their own powers in a different manner. Many times, the
Parliament did not agree with the judicial interpretation
and therefore, sought to amend the Constitution to
overcome the ruling of the judiciary. In the period between
1970 and 1975 this situation arose frequently.
In the chapter on the Judiciary, you have already
studied the issues of difference between the Judiciary and
the Parliament: one was the relationship between
fundamental rights and directive principles, the other was
the scope of right to private property and the third was
the scope of Parliament’s power to amend the Constitution.
In the period 1970-1975, the Parliament repeatedly made
amendments to overcome the adverse interpretations by
the judiciary.



Thirdly, there is another large group of amendments that
have been made as a result of the consensus among the
political parties. We may say that this consensus made it
necessary that some changes had to be made in order to
reflect the prevailing political philosophy and aspirations
of the society. In fact, many of the amendments of the
post-1984 period are instances of this trend. Remember
our question above about the peculiarity that even when
there were coalition governments, this period saw so many
amendments? The reason is because many of these
amendments were based on an evolving consensus on
certain issues. Starting with the anti-defection amendment
(52nd amendment), this period saw a series of amendments So, politicians do agree
in spite of the political turbulence. some matters! And yet t
Apart from the anti-defection amendments (52nd and fight over the meaning
91st), these amendments include the 61st amendment what they agreed on!
bringing down the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18
years, the 73rd and the 74th amendments, etc. In this same
period, there were some amendments clarifying and
expanding the scope of reservations in jobs and
admissions. After 1992-93, an overall consensus emerged
in the country about these measures and therefore,
amendments regarding these measures were passed
without much difficulty (77th, 81st, and 82nd
amendments).



There are many other examples of how judicial
interpretation changed our understanding of the
Constitution. In many decisions the Supreme Court had
held that reservations in jobs and educational institutions
cannot exceed fifty per cent of the total seats. This has
now become an accepted principle. Similarly, in the case
involving reservations for other backward classes, the
Supreme Court introduced the idea of creamy layer and
ruled that persons belonging to this category were not
entitled to benefits under reservations. In the same
manner, the Judiciary has contributed to an informal
amendment by interpreting various provisions concerning
right to education, right to life and liberty and the right to
form and manage minority educational institutions. These
are instances of how rulings by the Court contribute to
the evolution of the Constitution.
Review of the Constitution
In the late nineties, efforts were made to
review the entire Constitution. In the year
2000 a commission to review the working of
the Constitution was appointed by the
Government of India under the chairmanship
of a retired Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, Justice Venkatachaliah. Opposition
parties and many other organisations
boycotted the commission. While a lot of
political controversy surrounded this
commission, the commission stuck to the
theory of basic structure and did not suggest
any measures that would endanger the basic
structure of the Constitution. This shows the
significance of the basic structure doctrine
in our constitutional practice.
It’s all wrong. First they say
that an amendment requires
consensus and now we see
that Judges change the whole
meaning of the Constitution.



CONSTITUTION AS A LIVING DOCUMENT
We have described our Constitution as a living document. What does
that mean?
Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to
the situations and circumstances arising from time to time. Like a
living being, the Constitution responds to experience. In fact that is
the answer to the riddle we mentioned at the beginning about the
durability of the Constitution. Even after so many changes in the
society, the Constitution continues to work effectively because of this
ability to be dynamic, to be open to interpretations and the ability to
respond to the changing situation. This is a hallmark of a democratic
constitution. In a democracy, practices and ideas keep evolving over
time and the society engages in experiments according to these. A
constitution, which protects democracy and yet allows for evolution
of new practices becomes not only durable but also the object of
respect from the citizens. The important point is: has the Constitution
been able to protect itself and protect democracy?
In the past six decades, some very critical situations arose in the
politics and constitutional development of the country. We have made
a brief reference to some of these in this chapter already. In terms of
constitutional-legal issues, the most serious question that came up
Check your progress
State whether the following statements are correct
or not:
±
After the Basic Structure ruling, Parliament does
not have power to amend the Constitution.
±
The Supreme Court has given a clear list of the
basic features of our Constitution, which cannot
be amended.
±
Judiciary has the power to decide whether an
amendment violates basic structure or not.
±
The Kesavananda Bharati ruling has set clear
limits on Parliament’s power to amend the
Constitution.



People and leaders alike
hold to the vision and hope to realize it. Therefore, the Constitution,
based on this vision, has remained an object of respect and authority
even after half a century. The basic values governing our public
imagination remain intact.
Conclusion
There can still be debates about what constitutes basic structure.
There is nothing wrong in such debates.  We must remember
that politics in a democracy is necessarily full of debates and
differences. That is a sign of diversity, liveliness and openness.
Democracy welcomes debates. At the same time, our political
parties and leadership have shown maturity in setting limits to
these debates. Because, politics is also about compromises and
give-and-take. Extreme positions may be theoretically very correct
and ideologically very attractive, but politics demands that
everyone is prepared to moderate their extreme views, sharp
positions and reach a common minimum ground. Only then
democratic politics becomes possible. Politicians and the people
of India have understood and practised these skills. That has
made the experience of working of the democratic Constitution
quite successful. Among the different organs of the government,
there will always be competition over which one is more important
than the others. They will also always fight over what constitutes
Even within the Constituent Assembly, there were some
members who felt that this Constitution was not suited
to the Indian situation:
“The ideals on which this draft constitution is framed have
no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India.
…this Constitution …would not prove suitable and would
break down soon after being brought into operation.”