Constitution: Why and How?
This book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters that
follow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of our
Constitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government in
our country and their relationship with each other.
But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidents
and prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the
government and the various principles that bind the institutions of government
have their origin in the Constitution of India.
After studying this chapter, you  will learn:
± what a constitution means;
± what a constitution does to the society;
± how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and
± what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made.

WHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION?
What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does it
perform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily
existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you might
think.
Constitution allows coordination and
assurance
Imagine yourself to be a member of a
reasonably large group. Further imagine that
this group has the following characteristics.
The members of this group are diverse in
various ways. They have different religious
allegiances: some are Hindus, some are
Muslims, some Christians and some perhaps
profess no religion at all. They are also varied
in many different respects: they
pursue different professions, have
different abilities, have different
hobbies, different tastes in
everything from films to books.
Some are rich and some are poor.
Some are old, some young.
Imagine further that members of this group are likely to
have disputes over various aspects of life: How much
property should one be allowed to own?  Should it be
compulsory that every child be sent to school or should
the parents be allowed to decide? How much should this
group spend on its safety and security? Or should it build
more parks instead? Should the group be allowed to
discriminate against some of its members?  Every question
will elicit a variety of answers from different people. But,
for all their diversity, this group has to live together. They are
dependent upon each other in various ways. They require the
cooperation of each other. What will enable the group to live together
peacefully?
Yes, this could be my colony as
well! Does this apply to your
village or town or colony too?
This group is very much like the
people of my village.

One may say that perhaps members of this group can live together
if they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certain
basic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of some
basic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because they
would not know what members of this group could do to each other,
who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basic
rules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members of
that group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these
rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable.  If
citizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, they
will themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the
rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that
others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished.
The first function of a constitution is to provide a set of
basic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst
members of a society.
Activity
Enact the thought experiment of this section in the
classroom. The entire class should discuss and arrive
at some decisions that would apply to everyone for
this entire session. The decision could be about:
±
How would the class representatives be chosen?
±
Which decisions will the representative be able to
take on behalf of the entire class?
±
Are there some decisions that the class
representative cannot take without consulting the
entire class?
±
You can add any other items to this list (collection
of common kitty for the class, organisation of picnic
and trips, sharing of common resources, …) as long
as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you
include those subjects that have led to any
differences in the past.
±
How to revise these decisions in case you
need to?

±
Write down all these decisions on a paper and put
it up on the notice board. Which problems did you
encounter in this decision? Were there differences
among different students? How did you resolve
these differences? Did the entire class gain
something from this exercise?
Specification of decision making powers
A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to which
a state is constituted or governed. But what should these
fundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well,
the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what
the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, but
others may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferences
should govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to
live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best.
How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what
rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to
decide?
The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. It
specifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who
gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who
gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchical
constitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the old
Soviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in
democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide.
But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that the
people should decide, it will not answer the question: how should
the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agree
to it? Should  the people directly vote on each matter as the ancient
Greeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing
representatives? But if the people act through their representatives,
how should these representatives be elected? How many should there
be?
In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in most
instances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that
Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Before
identifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify
 certain procedures there would be something
obviously unjust about that government enacting these
laws.
So the third function of a constitution is to set
some limits on what a government can impose on its citizens. These limits are fundamental in the sense that government may never trespass them. Constitutions limit the power of government in many ways. The most common way of limiting the power of government is to specify certain fundamental rights that all of us possess as citizens and which no government can ever be allowed to violate. The exact content and interpretation of these rights varies from constitution to Ah! So you first create a monster constitution. But most constitutions will protect a basic and then start worrying about cluster of rights. Citizens will be protected from being saving yourself from it! I would arrested arbitrarily and for no reason. This is one basic say, why create this monster called limitation upon the power of government. Citizens will government in the first place? normally have the right to some basic liberties: to freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association, freedom to conduct a trade or business etc. In practice, these rights can be limited during times of national emergency and the constitution specifies the circumstances under which these rights may be withdrawn. Aspirations and goals of a society Most of the older constitutions limited themselves largely to allocating decision-making power and setting some limits to government power. But many twentieth century constitutions, of which the Indian Constitution is the finest example, also provide an enabling framework for the government to do certain positive things, to express the aspirations and goals of society. The Indian Constitution was particularly innovative in this respect.

For example, India aspires to be a society that is free of caste
discrimination. If this is our society’s aspiration, the government will
have to be enabled or empowered to take all the necessary steps to
achieve this goal. In a country like South Africa, which had a deep
history of racial discrimination, its new constitution had to enable
the government to end racial discrimination. More positively, a
constitution may enshrine the aspirations of a society. The framers
of the Indian Constitution, for example, thought that each
individual in society should have all that is necessary for them to
lead a life of minimal dignity and social self-respect — minimum
material well-being, education etc. The Indian Constitution
enables the government to take positive welfare measures
some of which are legally enforceable. As we go on studying
the Indian Constitution, we shall find that such enabling
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.
The constitution makers have to address themselves to very
different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between
different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these
different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this
balancing act?
4 December 1949

The Directive Principles of State
of Policy also enjoin government to fulfil certain
aspirations of the people.
The fourth function of a constitution is to enable the government to fulfil the aspirations of a society and create conditions for a just society. Enabling provisions of the Constitution What does it take to write nice Constitutions are not only rules and regulations things in the constitution? controlling the powers of the government. They What is the point in writing also give powers to the government for pursuing down lofty aspirations and collective good of the society. goals if they cannot change the ± Constitution of South Africa assigns many life of the people? responsibilities to the government: it wants the government to take measures to promote conservation of nature, make efforts to protect persons or groups subjected to unfair discrimination, and provides that the government must progressively ensure adequate housing to all, health care, etc. ± In the case of Indonesia also, the government is enjoined to establish and conduct national education system. The Indonesian Constitution ensures that the poor and destitute children will be looked after by the government. Fundamental identity of a people Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a people. This means the people as a collective entity come into being only through the basic constitution.
table ends

Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions.
For each of these write the function that this provision
performs.
The government cannot Limitations on the
order any citizen to follow power of the
or not to follow any religion government
The government must try
to reduce inequalities
in income and wealth
The President has the
power to appoint
the Prime Minister
The Constitution is the
supreme law that everyone
has to obey. The government cannot order any citizen to follow or not to follow any religion 
between the different regions of a nation and the central government
should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a
country.

Limitations on the power of the government
    The government must try to reduce inequalities in income and wealth.
    The President has the power to appoint the Prime Minister.
    The Constitution is the supreme law that everyone has to obey.

When we ask for the
constitution of a country we are usually referring to this
document. But some countries, the United Kingdom for
instance, do not have one single document that can be
called the Constitution. Rather they have a series of
documents and decisions that, taken collectively, are
referred to as the constitution. So, we can say that
constitution is the document or set of documents that
seeks to perform the functions that we mentioned above.
But many constitutions around the world exist only
on paper; they are mere words existing on a parchment.
The crucial question is: how effective is a constitution?
What makes it effective? What ensures that it has a real
impact on the lives of people? Making a constitution
effective depends upon many factors.

Mode of promulgation
This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who
crafted the constitution and how much authority did they
have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct
because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders
who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry
the people with them. The most successful constitutions,
like India, South Africa and the United States, are
constitutions which were created in the aftermath of
popular national movements.
The final
document reflected the broad
national consensus at the time.
Some countries have subjected
their constitution to a full-fledged
referendum, where all the people
vote on the desirability of a
constitution. 
The 
Indian
Constitution was never subjected
to such a referendum, but
nevertheless carried enormous
public authority, because it had
the consensus and backing of
leaders who were themselves
popular. 
Although 
the
Constitution itself was not
subjected to a referendum, the
people adopted it as their own by
abiding by its provisions.
Therefore, the authority of people
who enact the constitution helps
determine in part its prospects for
success.
The substantive provisions of a
constitution
It is the hallmark of a successful
constitution that it gives everyone
in society some reason to go along
with its provisions. A constitution
Debate over Constitution
making in Nepal:
Making a constitution is not always
an easy and smooth affair. Nepal
is an example of the complicated
nature of constitution making.
Since 1948, Nepal has had five
constitutions, in 1948, 1951, 1959,
1962 and 1990. But all these
constitutions were ‘granted’ by the
King 
of 
Nepal. 
The 
1990
constitution introduced a multi-
party competition, though the King
continued to hold final powers in
many respects. For many years
Nepal was faced with militant
political agitations for restructuring
the government. The main issue
was the role of the monarchy in the
constitution of Nepal. Some groups
in Nepal wanted to abolish the
institution of monarchy and
establish republican form of
government. Others believed that
it may be useful to shift to limited
monarchy with a reduced role for
the King. The King himself was not
ready to give up powers. He took
over all powers in October 2002.
Many political parties and
organisations demanded the
formation of a new constituent
assembly. The Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) was in the forefront
of the struggle for a popularly
elected constituent assembly.
Finally, under pressure of popular
agitation, the King had to install a
government acceptable to the
agitating parties. This government
has stripped the King of almost all
powers. In 2008, Nepal emerged as
a democratic republic after
abolishing the monarchy. Finally,
Nepal adopted a new constitution
in 2015.

that, for instance, allowed permanent majorities to oppress minority
groups within society would give minorities no reason to go along
with the provision of the constitution. Or a constitution that
systematically privileged some members at the expense of others, or
that systematically entrenched the power of small groups in society,
would cease to command allegiance. If any group feels their identity
is being stifled, they will have no reason to abide by the constitution.
No constitution by itself achieves perfect justice. But it has to convince
people that it provides the framework for pursuing basic justice.
Do this thought experiment. Ask yourself this question: What
would be the content of some basic rules in society, such that they
gave everyone a reason to go along with them?
The more a constitution preserves the freedom and equality of
all its members, the more likely it is to succeed. Does the Indian
Constitution, broadly speaking, give everyone a reason to go along
with its broad outlines? After studying this book, one should be
able to answer this question in the affirmative.
Balanced institutional design
Constitutions are often subverted, not by the people, but by small
groups, who wish to enhance their own power. Well crafted
constitutions fragment power in society intelligently so that no single
group can subvert the constitution. One way of such intelligent
designing of a constitution is to ensure that no single institution
acquires monopoly of power. This is often done by fragmenting power
across different institutions. The Indian Constitution, for example,
horizontally fragments power across different institutions like the
Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and even independent
statutory bodies like the Election Commission. This ensures that
even if one institution wants to subvert the Constitution, others can
check its transgressions. An intelligent system of checks and
balances has facilitated the success of the Indian Constitution.
Another important aspect of intelligent institutional design is:
that a constitution must strike the right balance between certain
values, norms and procedures as authoritative, and at the same
time allow enough flexibility in its operations to adapt to changing
needs and circumstances. Too rigid a constitution is likely to break
under the weight of change; a constitution that is, on the other


Successful constitutions strike the right
balance between preserving core values and
adapting them to new circumstances.


According to this plan:
± Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were
allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly
in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were
under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the
Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats.
± The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main
communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their
respective populations.
± Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative
Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of
proportional representation with single transferable vote.
± The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely
States was to be determined by consultation.
For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html
“We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it
social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a
way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the
principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a
union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to
defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced
from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can
liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality,
liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things…”


The previous section  discusses the three factors that
make a constitution effective and respectable. How far
does the Indian Constitution pass this test?
Composition of the Constituent Assembly
As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of
3 June 1947 those members who were elected from
territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be
members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of
members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284
members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and
appended their signature to the Constitution as finally
passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January
1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the
backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition
unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the
fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to
draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also
learnt the right lessons from the  unimaginable violence
that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was
committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not
only would minorities be secure, but religious identity
would have no bearing on citizenship rights.
But this account of the composition of the Constituent
Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only
the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although,
the members of the Assembly were not elected by
universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make
the Assembly a representative body. Members of all
religions were given representation under the scheme
described above; in addition, the Assembly had twenty-
eight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of
political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly
occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in
the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was
such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate
almost all shades of opinion within it.
What would have happened if
the Constituent Assembly was
elected by all the people of
India? Could it be very
different from what it was?

The Principle of Deliberation
The authority of the Constituent Assembly does not come only from
the fact that it was broadly, though not perfectly, representative. It
comes from the procedures it adopted to frame the Constitution and
the values its members brought to their deliberations. While in any
assembly that claims to be representative, it is desirable that diverse
sections of society participate, it is equally important that they
participate not only as representatives of their own identity or
community. Each member deliberated upon the Constitution with
the interests of the whole nation in mind. There were often
disagreements amongst members, but few of these disagreements
could be traced to members protecting their own interests.
There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences
were many: should India adopt a centralised or decentralised system
of government? What should be the relations between the States and
the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the
Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at
the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great
sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed
without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage
(meaning that all citizens reaching a certain age, would be entitled to
be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income).
So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who
should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously
discussed and debated. Nothing can be a better testament to the
democratic commitment of this Assembly.
The Constitution drew its authority from the fact that members
of the Constituent Assembly engaged in what one might call public
reason. The members of the Assembly placed a great emphasis on
discussion and reasoned argument. They did not simply advance
their own interests, but gave principled reasons to other members
for their positions. The very act of giving reasons to others makes
you move away from simply a narrow consideration of your own
interest because you have to give reasons to others to make them go
along with your view point. The voluminous debates in the
Constituent Assembly, where each clause of the Constitution was
subjected to scrutiny and debate, is a tribute to public reason at its
best. These debates deserved to be memorialised as one of the most
significant chapters in the history of constitution making, equal in
importance to the French and American revolutions.

But no constitution is simply a product of the Assembly
that produces it. An Assembly as diverse as the
Constituent Assembly of India could not have functioned
if there was no background consensus on the main
principles the Constitution should enshrine. These
principles were forged during the long struggle for
freedom. In a way, the Constituent Assembly was giving
concrete shape and form to the principles it had inherited
from the nationalist movement. For decades preceding
the promulgation of the Constitution, the nationalist
movement had debated many questions that were
relevant to the making of the constitution — the shape
and form of government India should have, the values it
should uphold, the inequalities it should overcome.
Answers forged in those debates were given their final
form in the Constitution.
Perhaps the best summary of the principles that the
nationalist movement brought to the Constituent
Assembly is the Objective Resolution (the resolution that
defined the aims of the Assembly) moved by Nehru in
1946. This resolution encapsulated the aspirations and
values behind the Constitution. What the previous section
terms as substantive provisions of the constitution is
inspired by and summed up by the values incorporated
in the Objectives Resolution. Based on this resolution,
our Constitution gave institutional expression to these
fundamental commitments: equality, liberty, democracy.
The Assembly met for one hundred and sixty
six days, spread over two years and eleven months. Its
sessions were open to the press and the public alike.

Main points of the Objectives Resolution
India is an independent, sovereign, republic;
India shall be a Union of erstwhile British Indian
territories, Indian States, and other parts outside
British India and Indian States as are willing to be a
part of the Union;
Territories forming the Union shall be autonomous
units and exercise all powers and functions of the
Government and administration, except those assigned
to or vested in the Union;
All powers and authority of sovereign and independent
India and its constitution shall flow from the people;
All people of India shall be guaranteed and secured
social, economic and political justice; equality of status
and opportunities and equality before law; and
fundamental freedoms - of speech, expression, belief,
faith, worship, vocation, association and action -
subject to law and public morality;
The minorities, backward and tribal areas, depressed
and other backward classes shall be provided adequate
safeguards;
The territorial integrity of the Republic and its sovereign
rights on land, sea and air shall be maintained
according to justice and law of civilized nations;
The land would make full and willing contribution to
the promotion of world peace and welfare of mankind.
Institutional arrangements
The third factor ensuring effectiveness of a constitution is a balanced
arrangement of the institutions of government. The basic principle is
that government must be democratic and committed to the welfare
of the people. The Constituent Assembly spent a lot of time on
evolving the right balance among the various institutions like the
executive, the legislature and the judiciary. This led to the
adoption of the parliamentary form and the federal arrangement,
which would distribute governmental powers between the


Provisions adapted from
constitutions of different
countries
British Constitution
First Past the Post
Parliamentary Form of
Government
The idea of the rule of law
Institution of the Speaker
and her/his role
Law-making procedure
United States
Constitution
Charter of
Fundamental
Rights
Power of Judicial
Review and
independence of
the judiciary
Irish
Constitution
Directive
Principles of
State Policy
French
Constitution
Principles of
Liberty, Equality
and Fraternity
Canadian
Constitution
A quasi-federal form
of government (a
federal system with a
strong central
government)
The idea of Residual
Powers

Conclusion
It is a tribute to the wisdom and foresight of the makers of the
Constitution that they presented to the nation a document that
enshrined fundamental values and highest aspirations shared
by the people. This is one of the reasons why this most intricately
crafted document has not only survived but become a living
reality, when so many other constitutions have perished with
the paper they were first written on.
India’s Constitution is a unique document which in turn
became an exemplar for many other constitutions, most notably
South Africa. The main purpose behind the long search that
went on for almost three years was to strike the right balance
so that institutions created by the Constitution would not be
haphazard or tentative arrangements but would be able to
accommodate the aspirations of the people of India for a long
time to come. You will know more about these arrangements
through the study of the remaining chapters in this book.