51
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Chapter Three
ELECTION AND
REPRESENTATION
INTRODUCTION
Have you ever played chess? What would happen if the black knight suddenly
started moving straight rather than two and a half squares? Or, what would
happen if in a game of cricket, there were no umpires? In any sport, we need to
follow certain rules. Change the rules and the outcome of the game would be
very different. Similarly a game needs an impartial umpire whose decision is
accepted by all the players. The rules and the umpire have to be agreed upon
before we begin to play a game. What is true of a game is also true of elections.
There are different rules or systems of conducting elections. The outcome of the
election depends on the rules we have adopted. We need some machinery to
conduct the elections in an impartial manner. Since these two decisions need to
be taken before the game of electoral politics can begin, these cannot be left to
any government. That is why these basic decisions about elections are written
down in the constitution of a democratic country.
In this chapter we shall study the constitutional provisions regarding elections
and representation. We shall focus on the importance of the method of election
chosen in our Constitution and the implications of the constitutional provisions
regarding impartial machinery for conducting elections. We shall also look at
some suggestions for amending the constitutional provisions in this respect. After
reading this chapter, you would understand:
± different methods of election;
± the characteristics of the system of election adopted in our country;
± the importance of the provisions for free and fair elections; and
± the debate on electoral reforms.

table starts| Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust. | R C
EAD A ARTOON
17 February 1957 |
| --- | --- |
|  | They say elections are carnival of democracy. But this cartoon depicts chaos instead. Is this true of elections always? Is it good for democracy? |

table ends


Chapter 3: Election and Representation
democracy. But this kind of direct democracy cannot be
practiced when a decision has to be taken by lakhs and
crores of people. That is why rule by the people usually
means rule by people’s representatives.
In such an arrangement citizens choose their
representatives who, in turn, are actively involved in
governing and administering the country. The method
followed to choose these representatives is referred to as
an election. Thus, the citizens have a limited role in taking
major decisions and in running the administration. They
are not very actively involved in making of the policies.
Citizens are involved only indirectly, through their elected
representatives. In this arrangement, where all major
decisions are taken by elected representatives, the method
by which people elect their representatives becomes very
important.
The second question reminds us of the fact that not
all elections are democratic. A large number of non-
democratic countries also hold elections. In fact non-
democratic rulers are very keen to present themselves as
democratic. They do so by holding election in such a way
that it does not threaten their rule. Can you think of some
examples of such non-democratic elections? What do you
think would distinguish a democratic from a non-
democratic election? What can be done to ensure that
elections in a country would be conducted in a
democratic way?
This is where constitution comes in. The constitution
of a democratic country lays down some basic rules about
elections. The details are usually left to be worked out by
laws passed by the legislatures. These basic rules are
usually about
±
Who is eligible to vote?
±
Who is eligible to contest?
±
Who is to supervise elections?
±
How do the voters choose their representatives?
±
How are the votes to be counted and
representatives elected?
What is the need of writing
these rules in the constitution?
Why can’t these be decided by
the Parliament? Or by all the
parties before every election?

Like most democratic constitutions, the Constitution of India
answers all these questions. As you can see, the first three questions
are about ensuring that elections are free and fair and can thus be
called democratic. The last two questions are about ensuring a fair
representation. In this chapter you will consider both these aspects
of the Constitutional provisions about elections.
ELECTION SYSTEM IN INDIA
You may have noted above a reference to different methods or the
systems of elections. You may have wondered what these were all
about. You may have seen or read about different methods of
electioneering or campaigning in the elections. But what are different
methods of elections? There is a system of conducting elections. There
are authorities and rules about do’s and don’ts. Is that what election
system is all about? You may have wondered why the constitution
needs to write down how the votes are to be counted and
representatives elected. Isn’t that very obvious? People go and vote.
The candidate who gets highest votes gets elected. That is what
elections are all over the world. Why do we need to think about it?
We need to, because this question is not as simple as it appears
to us. We have got so used to our system of elections that we think
that there cannot be any other way. In a democratic election, people
vote and their preference decides who will win the contest. But there
Activity
Collect newspaper clippings about elections in India
and any other country. Classify the clippings in the
following categories:
a.
System of representation
b. Voter eligibility
c.
Role of the Election Commission.
If you have access to internet, visit the
websites of the Election Commission of India,
https://eci.gov.in, and ACE project, The Electoral
Knowledge Network, http://aceproject.org and
collect the information mentioned above for at
least four countries.

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
can be very different ways in which people make their choices and
very different ways in which their preferences can be counted. These
different rules of the game can make a difference to who the winner
of the game will be. Some rules can favour bigger parties; some rules
can help the smaller players. Some rules can favour the majority
community, others can protect the minorities. Let us look at one
dramatic instance to see how this happens.
First Past the Post System
Look at the newspaper clipping.
Activity
Hold mock elections in your class to elect four class
representatives. Hold the election in three different ways:
±
Each student can give one vote.  The four highest vote getters
are elected.
±
Each student has four votes and can give them all to one
candidate or split the votes among different candidates. The
four highest vote getters are elected.
±
Each voter gives a preference ranking to candidates and the
counting follows the method of election of Rajya Sabha
members described below.
Did the same four persons win the election in each of these
methods? If not, what was the difference? Why?

It talks of one historic moment in India’s democracy.
In the Lok Sabha elections of 1984, the Congress party
came to power winning 415 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats –
more than 80% of the seats. Such a victory was never
achieved by any party in the Lok Sabha. What did this
election show?
The Congress party won four-fifths of the seats. Does
it mean that four out of five Indian voters voted for the
Congress party? Actually not. Take a look at the enclosed
table. The Congress party got 48% of the votes. This means
that only 48% of those who voted, voted in favour of the
candidates put up by the Congress party, but the party
still managed to win more than 80% of the seats in the
Lok Sabha.  Look at the performance of other parties. The
BJP got 7.4 per cent votes but less than one per cent seats.
How did that happen?
Less than 50 per cent votes and
more than 80 per cent seats!
Isn’t that unfair? How could
our Constitution makers accept
such an unfair system?
Votes and seats won by some major parties
in Lok Sabha Election of 1984
Party
Votes (%)
Seats
Congress
 48.0
415
BJP
   7.4
    2
Janata
   6.7
  10
Lok Dal
   5.7
    3
CPI (M)
   5.7
  22
Telugu Desam
   4.1
  30
DMK
   2.3
    2
AIADMK
   1.6
  12
Akali Dal
   1.0
    7
AGP
   1.0
    7
This happened because in our country we follow a
special method of elections. Under this system:
±
The entire country is divided into 543 constituencies;
±
Each constituency elects one representative; and
±
The candidate who secures the highest number of
votes in that constituency is declared elected.
It is important to note that in this system whoever has

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
more votes than all other candidates, is declared elected.
The winning candidate need not secure a majority of the
votes. This method is called the First Past the Post (FPTP)
system. In the electoral race, the candidate who is ahead
of others, who crosses the winning post first of all, is the
winner. This method is also called the Plurality System.
This is the method of election prescribed by the
Constitution.
Let us now go back to our example. The Congress
party won greater share of seats than its share of votes
because in many of the  constituencies in which its
candidates won, they secured less than 50% of the votes.
If there are several candidates, the winning candidate often
gets much less than 50% of the votes. The votes that go to
all the losing candidates go ‘waste’, for those candidates
or parties get no seat from those votes. Suppose a party
gets only 25 per cent of the votes in every constituency,
but everyone else gets even less votes. In that case, the
party could win all the seats with only 25 per cent votes
or even less.
Proportional Representation
Let us compare this to how elections take place in Israel
that follows a very different system of elections. In Israel
once the votes are counted, each party is allotted the share
of seats in the parliament in proportion to its share of
votes (see Box). Each party fills its quota of seats by picking
those many of its nominees from a preference list that has
been declared before the elections. This system of elections
is called the Proportional Representation (PR) system. In
this system a party gets the same proportion of seats as
its proportion of votes.
In the PR system there could be two variations. In
some countries, like Israel or Netherlands, the entire
country is treated as one constituency and seats are
allocated to each party according to its share of votes in
the national election. The other method is when the
country is divided into several multi-member
This is very confusing! How do
I know who is my MP or my
MLA in this system? Who
would I go to if I have any
work?

table starts| Propor
Israel f
the legi
list of it
A party
This al
represe
votes t
multi-p
The
Based
in that
Name
Likud
Zionist
Joint L
Democr
for Ren
Yesh At
Kulanu
Habayi
Shas
Yisrael
United
58 |  | by a party. Thus, representatives from a constituency, would and
do belong to different parties. In India, we have adopted PR system |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | tional Representation in Israel ollows proportional representation system of election. Elections to slature (Knesset) take place every four years. Every party declares a s candidates, but voters vote for the party and not for the candidates. gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the votes polled by it. lows even smaller parties with very small support base to get ntation in the legislature. (A party must get a minimum of 3.25% o be eligible to get seats in the legislature.) This often leads to a arty coalition government. following table shows the result of the 2015 elections to the Knesset. on this, you can find out what percentage of seats various parties got election. |  |  |  |
|  | Name | of List (Party) | % of total votes | Number of seats | % of total seats |
|  | Likud |  | 23.40 | 30 |  |
|  | Zionist | Camp | 18.67 | 24 |  |
|  | Joint L Democr for Ren | ist (Hadash, National atic Assembly, Arab Movement ewal, United Arab List) | 10.61 | 13 |  |
|  | Yesh At | id | 8.82 | 11 |  |
|  | Kulanu |  | 7.49 | 10 |  |
|  | Habayi | t Hayehudi | 6.74 | 8 |  |
|  | Shas |  | 5.74 | 7 |  |
|  | Yisrael | Beitenu | 5.10 | 6 |  |
|  | United | Torah Judaism | 4.99 | 6 |  |
|  | 8 |  |  |  |  |
|  | Israel’s | Left | 3.93 | 5 |  |
|  | Other P | arties | 4.51 | 0 |  |
|  | Total |  | 100 | 120 |  |

table ends


table starts|  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Comparison of FPTP an FPTP The country is divided into small geographical units called constituencies or districts Every constituency elects one representative Voter votes for a candidate A party may get more seats than votes in the legislature Candidate who wins the election may not get majority (50%+1) votes Examples: U.K., India | d PR system of election PR Large geographical areas are demarcated as constituencies. The entire country may be a single constituency More than one representative may be elected from one constituency Voter votes for the party Every party gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the percentage of votes that it gets Candidate who wins the elections gets majority of votes. Examples: Israel, Netherlands |  |
|  |  |  |  |

table ends

table starts| Comparison of FPTP an | d PR system of election |
| --- | --- |

table ends

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
on a limited scale for indirect elections. The Constitution prescribes
a third and complex variation of the PR system for the election of
President, Vice President, and for the election to the Rajya Sabha
and Vidhan Parishads.

How does PR work in Rajya Sabha elections
A third variant of PR, the Single Transferable Vote system
(STV), is followed for Rajya Sabha elections. Every State
has a specific quota of seats in the Rajya Sabha. The
members are elected by the respective State legislative
assemblies. The voters are the MLAs in that State. Every
voter is required to rank candidates according to her or
his preference. To be declared the winner, a candidate
must secure a minimum quota of votes, which is
determined by a formula:






Total votes polled
+1
Total number of candidates to be elected +1
For example if 4 Rajya Sabha members have to be
elected by the 200 MLAs in Rajasthan, the winner would
require (200/4+1= 40+1) 41 votes. When the votes are
counted it is done on the basis of first preference votes
secured by each candidate, of which the candidate has
secured the first preference votes. If after the counting of
all first preference votes, required number of candidates
fail to fulfil the quota, the candidate who secured the
lowest votes of first preference is eliminated and his/her
votes are transferred to those who are mentioned as
second preference on those ballot papers. This process
continues till the required number of candidates are
declared elected.
Why did India adopt the FPTP system?
The answer is not very difficult to guess. If you have carefully read
the box explaining the Rajya Sabha elections, you would have noticed
that it is a complicated system which may work in a small country,
but would be difficult to work in a sub-continental country like India.
The reason for the popularity and success of the FPTP system is its
simplicity. The entire election system is extremely simple to
understand even for common voters who may have no specialised

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
knowledge about politics and elections.  There is also a clear choice
presented to the voters at the time of elections. Voters have to simply
endorse a candidate or a party while voting. Depending on the nature
of actual politics, voters may either give greater importance to the
party or to the candidate or balance the two.  The FPTP system offers
voters a choice not simply between parties but specific candidates.
In other electoral systems, especially PR systems, voters are often
asked to choose a party and the representatives are elected on the
basis of party lists. As a result, there is no one representative who
represents and is responsible for one locality. In constituency based
system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representative
is and can hold him or her accountable.
More importantly, the makers of our Constitution also felt that
PR based election may not be suitable for giving a stable government
in a parliamentary system. We shall study the nature of parliamentary
system of executive in the next chapter. This system requires that
the executive has majority in the legislature. You will notice that the
PR system may not produce a clear majority because seats in the
legislature would be divided on the basis of share of votes. The FPTP
These members of the ruling party are trying to listen to the
‘tiny’ opposition! Was this the effect of our electoral system?
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.
29 May 1949

table starts| ± Which party would have a majority?
± Who would form the government?
± What would be the effect of this system on
the relationship of political parties?
Total Seats: 234 (Election held in 232)
Party % of total Number of Seats in PR
votes seats
AIADMK 40.77 135
DMK 31.64 88
INC 6.42 8
PMK 5.32 0
BJP 2.84 0
DMDK 2.39 0 |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Total Seats: 234 (Election held in 232) |  |  |  |
|  | Party | % of total votes | Number of seats | Seats in PR |
|  | AIADMK | 40.77 | 135 |  |
|  | DMK | 31.64 | 88 |  |
|  | INC | 6.42 | 8 |  |
|  | PMK | 5.32 | 0 |  |
|  | BJP | 2.84 | 0 |  |
|  | DMDK | 2.39 | 0 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  | CPI | 0.79 | 0 |  |
|  | IUML | 0.73 | 1 |  |
|  | Others Parties | 6.37 | 0 |  |
| Independents 1.43 0 NOTA 1.30 – system generally gives the largest party or coalition some extra bonus seats, more than their share of votes would allow. Thus this system makes it possible for parliamentary government to function smoothly and effectively by facilitating the formation of a stable government. Finally, the FPTP system encourages voters from different social groups to come together to win an election in a locality. In a diverse country like India, a PR system would encourage each community to form its own nation-wide party. This may also have been at the back of the mind of our constitution makers. The experience of the working of the Constitution has confirmed 62 the expectation of the constitution makers. The FPTP system has |  |  |  |  |
|  | Independents | 1.43 | 0 |  |
|  | NOTA | 1.30 | – |  |

table ends

Check your progress
Here are the results of the Tamil Nadu Assembly
Election held in 2016.
±
What would be the composition of the
Assembly if it was a PR system like in Israel?

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
votes only from one caste or community. Normally, the working of
the FPTP system results in a two-party system. This means that
there are two major competitors for power and power is often shared
by these two parties alternately. It is difficult for new parties or the
third party to enter the competition and share power. In this respect,
the experience of FPTP in India is slightly different. After
independence, though we adopted the FPTP system, there emerged
a one party dominance and along with it, there existed many smaller
parties. After 1989, India is witnessing the functioning of the multi-
party coalitions. At the same time, gradually, in many States, a two-
party competition is emerging. But the distinguishing feature of
India’s party system is that the rise of coalitions has made it possible
for new and smaller parties to enter into electoral competition in spite
of the FPTP system.
RESERVATION OF CONSTITUENCIES
We have noticed that in the FPTP election system, the candidate who
secures the highest votes in a particular constituency is declared
elected. This often works to the disadvantage of the smaller social
groups. This is even more significant in the Indian social context. We
have had a history of caste-based discrimination. In such a social
system, the FPTP electoral system can mean that the dominant social
groups and castes can win everywhere and the oppressed social
groups may continue to remain unrepresented.  Our Constitution
makers were aware of this difficulty and the need to provide a way to
ensure fair and just representation to the oppressed social groups.
This issue was debated even before independence and the British
government had introduced ‘separate electorates’. This system meant
Tajamul Husain, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 333, 26 May 1949
“Separate electorates have been a curse to India, have
done incalculable harm to this country… Separate
electorates have barred our progress… We (Muslims)
want to merge in the nation. ...for God’s sake keep
your hands off reservation for the Muslim
community.”

that for electing a representative from a particular community, only
those voters would be eligible who belong to that community. In the
Constituent Assembly, many members expressed a fear that this
will not suit our purposes. Therefore, it was decided to adopt the
system of reserved constituencies. In this system, all voters in a
constituency are eligible to vote but the candidates must belong to
only a particular community or social section for which the seat is
reserved.
There are certain social groups which may be spread across the
country. In a particular constituency, their numbers may not be
sufficient to be able to influence a victory of a candidate.  However,
taken across the country they are a significantly sizeable group. To
ensure their proper representation, a system of reservation becomes
necessary. The Constitution provides for reservation of seats in the
Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. This provision was made initially for a period
of 10 years and as a result of successive constitutional amendments,
has been extended up to 2030. The Parliament can take a decision
to further extend it, when the period of reservation expires. The
number of seats reserved for both of these groups is in proportion to
their share in the population of India. Of the 543 elected seats in the
Lok Sabha, 84 are reserved for Scheduled Castes and 47 are reserved
for Scheduled Tribes (as on 26 January 2019).
“…But I have come to say a few words on behalf of the
Adivasis of India…. In the past, thanks to the major
political parties, thanks to the British Government and
thanks to every enlightened Indian citizen, we have been
isolated and kept, as it were, in a zoo. ...We are willing to
mix with you, and it is for that reason, ..., that we have
insisted on a reservation of seats as far as the Legislatures
are concerned. We have not asked ...(for) separate
electorates; ...Under the 1935 Act, throughout the
Legislatures in India, there were altogether only 24
Adivasi MLAs out of a total of 1585, …and not a single
representative at the Centre.”
Jaipal Singh, CAD, Vol. V, pp. 209-210, 27 August 1947

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Who decides which constituency is to be reserved? On what basis
is this decision taken? This decision is taken by an independent
body called the Delimitation Commission. The Delimitation
Commission is appointed by the President of India and works in
collaboration with the Election Commission of India.  It is appointed for
the purpose of drawing up the boundaries of constituencies all over the
country. A quota of constituencies to be reserved in each State is fixed
depending on the proportion of SC or ST in that State. After drawing
the boundaries, the Delimitation Commission looks at the composition
of population in each constituency. Those constituencies that have the
highest proportion of Scheduled Tribe population are reserved for ST.
In the case of Scheduled Castes, the Delimitation Commission looks at
two things. It picks constituencies that have higher proportion of
Scheduled Caste population. But it also spreads these constituencies
in different regions of the State.  This is done because the Scheduled
Caste population is generally spread evenly throughout the country.
These reserved constituencies can be rotated each time the
Delimitation exercise is undertaken.
The Constitution does not make similar reservation for other
disadvantaged groups. Of late there has been a strong demand
seeking reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies
for women. Given the fact that very few women are elected to
representative bodies, the demand for reserving one-third seats for
women was articulated for many years. Reservation of seats for
women has already been provided for rural and urban local bodies.
We shall discuss this in chapter on Local Governments. A similar
provision for Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabhas has been provided
through the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam (Women's Reservation
Act, 2023).
FREE
REE
REE
REE
REE AND
AND
AND
AND
AND F
 F
 F
 F
 FAIR
AIR
AIR
AIR
AIR E
 E
 E
 E
 ELECTIONS
LECTIONS
LECTIONS
LECTIONS
LECTIONS
The true test of any election system is its ability to ensure a free and
fair electoral process. If we want democracy to be translated into
reality on the ground, it is important that the election system is
impartial and transparent. The system of election must also allow
the aspirations of the voter to find legitimate expression through the
electoral results.

table starts|  | similar situation prevails in most State Assemblies.
Three students drew different conclusions from this
fact. Write down whether and why you agree or
disagree with each of them.
Hilal: This demonstrates the unfairness of the
FPTP system. We should have opted for PR system.
Arif: This shows the wisdom of granting
reservations to SC and ST. What is needed is a
reservation of seats for Muslims on the same lines as
for SC and ST.
Saba: There is no point in talking about Muslims
as a whole. Muslim women are not going to get any
share in any of these systems. We need a separate
quota for Muslim women.
Universal franchise and right to contest
Apart from laying down a method of elections, the
Constitution answers two basic questions about elections: |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Who are the voters? Who can contest elections? In both these respects our Constitution follows the well established |
|  | democratic practices. Am I or am I not an adult? I You already know that democratic elections require am mature enough to choose that all adult citizens of the country must be eligible to my future career, old enough vote in the elections. This is known as universal adult to get a driving license, but not franchise. In many countries, citizens had to fight long old enough to vote! If laws battles with the rulers to get this right. In many countries, can apply to me, why can’t I decide on who makes those women could get this right very late and only after laws? struggle. One of the important decisions of the framers of the Indian Constitution was to guarantee every adult citizen in India, the right to vote. 66 Till 1989, an adult Indian meant an Indian citizen |  |

table ends


table starts|  | R A C
EAD ARTOON
21 October 1951 |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| R A C EAD ARTOON right. But our Constitution makers had a firm belief in the ability and worth of all adult citizens as equals in the matter of deciding what is good for the society, the country and for their own constituencies. What is true of the right to vote is also true of right to contest election. All citizens have the right to stand for election and become the representative of the people. However, there are different minimum age requirements for contesting elections. For example, in order to stand for Lok Sabha or Assembly election, a candidate must be at least 25 years old. There are some other restrictions also. For instance, there is a legal provision that a person who has undergone imprisonment for two or more years for some offence is disqualified from contesting 21 October 195 elections. But there are no restrictions of income, education Why is universal adult franchise compare or class or gender on the right to to an elephant? Is it unmanageable? Or is i contest elections. In this sense, like the story in which everyone describes th our system of election is open to elephant only by its parts? all citizens. | R A C EAD ARTOON 21 October | 195 |  |
|  | Why is universal adult franchise compare to an elephant? Is it unmanageable? Or is i like the story in which everyone describes th elephant only by its parts? |  | d t e |

table ends

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Independent Election Commission
Several efforts have been made in India to ensure the free and fair
election system and process. The most important among these is the
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

creation of an independent Election Commission to ‘supervise and
conduct’ elections. Do you know that in many countries, there is an
absence of an independent mechanism for conducting elections?
Article 324 of the Indian Constitution provides for an independent
Election Commission for the ‘superintendence, direction and control
of the electoral roll and the conduct of elections’ in India. These words
in the Constitution are very important, for they give the Election
Commission a decisive role in virtually everything to do with elections.
The Supreme Court has agreed with this interpretation of the
Constitution.
To assist the Election Commission of India there is a Chief Electoral
Officer in every state. The Election Commission is not responsible for
the conduct of local body elections. As we shall study in the chapter
on Local Government, the State Election Commissioners work
independently of the Election Commission of India and each has its
own sphere of operation.
The Election Commission of India can either be a single member
or a multi-member body. Till 1989, the Election Commission was
single member. Just before the 1989 general elections, two Election
Commissioners were appointed, making the body multi-member.
Soon after the elections, the Commission reverted to its single member
status. In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again
appointed and the Commission became multi-member and has
remained multi-member since then. Initially there were many
apprehensions about a multi-member Commission. There was a
sharp difference of opinion between the then Chief Election
Article 324: (1)
The superintendence, direction and control of
the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and
the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and
to the Legislature of every State and of
elections to the offices of President and Vice-
President held under this Constitution shall
be vested in a Commission (referred to in this
Constitution as the Election Commission).

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Commissioner and the other Commissioners about who
had how much power. The matter had to be settled by the
Supreme Court. Now there is a general consensus that a
multi-member Election Commission is more appropriate
as power is shared and there is greater accountability.
The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) presides over
the Election Commission, but does not have more powers
than the other Election Commissioners. The CEC and the
two Election Commissioners have equal powers to take
all decisions relating to elections as a collective body.  They
are appointed by the President of India on the advice of
the Council of Ministers. It is therefore possible for a ruling
party to appoint a partisan person to the Commission
who might favour them in the elections. This fear has led
many to suggest that this procedure should be changed.
Many persons have suggested that a different method
should be followed that makes consultation with the leader
of opposition and the Chief Justice of India necessary for
the appointment of CEC and Election Commissioners.
The Constitution ensures the security of the tenure of
the CEC and Election Commissioners. They are appointed
for a six year term or continue till the age of 65, whichever
is earlier. The CEC can be removed before the expiry of
Has this now been settled? Or
can the government go back to
a single member Election
Commission? 
Does 
the
Constitution allow this game?
Special majority
Special majority means:
±
Two-thirds majority of those present and voting, and
±
Simple majority of the total membership of the House.
Let us say that you have to pass a resolution in your class
with a special majority. Imagine further that your class has a total
student strength of 57. But on the day of voting, only 51 students
are present and 50 students participated in voting. When would
you say that the resolution has been passed with ‘special majority’
in this situation?
In this book you will find mention of ‘special majority’ in at
least three other chapters.  One is in the next chapter on Executive,
where we discuss the impeachment of the President of India. Find
out the other two places where special majority is discussed.

the term, by the President if both Houses of Parliament make such a
recommendation with a special majority. This is done to ensure that
a ruling party cannot remove a CEC who refuses to favour it in
elections. The Election Commissioners can be removed by the
President of India.
The Election Commission of India has a wide range of functions.
±
It supervises the preparation of up-to-date voters’ list. It makes
every effort to ensure that the voters’ list is free of errors like non-
existence of names of registered voters or existence of names of
those non-eligible or non-existent.
±
It also determines the timing of elections and prepares the election
schedule.  The election schedule includes the notification of
elections, date from which nominations can be filed, last date for
filing nominations, last date of scrutiny, last date of withdrawal,
date of polling and date of counting and declaration of results.
±
During this entire process, the Election Commission has the power
to take decisions to ensure a free and fair poll. It can postpone or
cancel the election in the entire country or a specific State or
constituency on the grounds that the atmosphere is vitiated and
therefore, a free and fair election may not be possible.   The
Commission also implements a model code of conduct for parties
and candidates. It can order a re-poll in a specific constituency.
It can also order a recount of votes when it feels that the counting
process has not been fully fair and just.
±
The Election Commission accords recognition to political parties
and allots symbols to each of them.
The Election Commission has very limited staff of its own. It
conducts the elections with the help of the administrative machinery.
However, once the election process has begun, the commission has
control over the administration as far as election related work is
concerned. During the election process, the administrative officers of
the State and central governments are assigned election related duty
and in this respect, the Election Commission has full control over
them. The EC can transfer the officers, or stop their transfers; it can
take action against them for failing to act in a non-partisan manner.
Over the years, the Election Commission of India has emerged as
an independent authority which has asserted its powers to ensure
fairness in the election process. It has acted in an impartial and
unbiased manner in order to protect the sanctity of the electoral
process. The record of Election Commission also shows that every

table starts| had in the Constitution.
Since 1951–52, seventeen
Lok Sabha elections have been
held. Many more State assembly
R A C
elections and by-elections have EAD ARTOON
been conducted by the Election
Commission. The EC has faced
many difficult situations such as
holding elections in militancy
affected areas like Assam,
Punjab or Jammu and Kashmir.
It has also faced the difficult
situation of having to postpone
the election process mid-way in
1991 when the ex-Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated
during campaigning. In 2002,
the Election Commission faced
another critical situation when
the Gujarat Assembly was
dissolved and elections had to be
conducted. But the Election
Commission found that
unprecedented violence in
that State had made it
impossible to hold free and fair
elections immediately. The
Election Commission decided
to postpone elections to the
The Netaji is afraid of EC. Why do leader
State Assembly by a few |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | R A C EAD ARTOON |  |  |
|  | The Netaji is afraid of EC. Why do le | ader |  |
|  | fear the Election Commission? Is this for democracy? |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
R K Laxman in The Times of India.

table starts| The Commission can issue orders to
government employees engaged in any election
related duty.
The government cannot remove the Chief
Election Commissioner.
The Commission can cancel an election if it
thinks that it was not fair.
E R
LECTORAL EFORMS |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | No system of election can ever be perfect. And in actual election process, there are bound to be many flaws and |
| limitations. Any democratic society has to keep searching for mechanisms to make elections free and fair to the maximum. With the acceptance of adult suffrage, freedom to contest elections, and the establishment of an independent Election Commission, India has tried to make Can we reduce the influence of its election process free and fair. However, the experience money and muscle power by of the past 72 years has given rise to many suggestions changing the law? Does for reforming our election system. The Election anything change in reality by Commission, political parties, various independent changing the law? groups, and many scholars have come up with proposals for electoral reform. Some of these suggestions are about 72 changing the constitutional provisions discussed in this |  |

table ends


table starts| elections expenses should
be paid by the government R A C
EAD ARTOON
out of a special fund.
± Candidates with any
criminal case should be
barred from contesting
elections, even if their
appeal is pending before a
court.
± There should be complete
ban on the use of caste and
religious appeals in the
campaign.
± There should be a law to
regulate the functioning of
political parties and to
ensure that they function in
a transparent and
democratic manner.
These are but a few
suggestions. There is no
consensus about these
suggestions. Even if there was
a consensus, there are limits to
what the laws and formal
provisions can do. Free and fair
elections can be held only if the
Should a person accused of a serious crime
candidates, the parties and
be barred from contesting elections?
those involved in the election
process agree to abide by the
spirit of democratic competition. | R K Laxman in The Times of India. |
| --- | --- |

table ends

table starts| R A C
EAD ARTOON |  |
| --- | --- |
| Should a person accused of a serious crime be barred from contesting elections? |  |

table ends

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

vigilant, more actively involved in political activities. But there are
limits to the extent to which ordinary people can engage in politics
on a regular basis. Therefore, it is necessary that various political
institutions and voluntary organisations are developed and are active
in functioning as watchdog for ensuring free and fair elections.
Conclusion
In countries where representative democracy is practiced,
elections and the representative character of those elections
are crucial factors in making democracy effective and
trustworthy. The success of India’s election system can be
gauged from a number of factors.
±
Our election system has allowed the voters not only to freely
choose representatives, but also to change governments
peacefully both at the State and national level.
±
Secondly, voters have consistently taken a keen interest in
the election process and participated in it. The number of
candidates and parties that contest elections is on the rise.
±
Thirdly, the system of election has proved to be
accommodative and inclusive. The social composition of our
representatives has changed gradually. Now our representatives
come from many different social sections, though the number
of women legislators has not increased satisfactorily.
±
Fourthly, the election outcome in most parts of the country
does not reflect electoral malpractices and rigging. Of course,
many attempts at rigging do take place. You must have read
about violence, about complaints that voters’ names disappear
from the voters’ list, about intimidation, and so on. Yet, such
instances rarely directly affect the outcome of the election.
±
Finally and most importantly, elections have become a part
and parcel of our democratic life. No one can imagine a situation
where a government would disrespect the verdict of an election.
Similarly, no one can imagine that a government would be
formed without holding elections. In fact, regularity and
periodicity of elections has earned fame for India as a great
democratic experiment.

Chapter 3: Election and Representation
All these factors have earned for our election system a
respect within and outside the country. The voter in India has
gained confidence. The legitimacy of the Election Commission
has increased in the eyes of the people.  This vindicates the
basic decisions taken by our Constitution makers. If the election
process becomes more flawless, we as voters and citizens would
be able to share more effectively in this carnival of democracy
and make it more meaningful.