150
INTRODUCTION
Look at the political maps (on next two pages) of India 1947 and 2017. They
have changed dramatically over the years. Boundaries of States have changed,
names of States have changed, and the number of States has changed. When
India became independent, we had a number of provinces that the British
government had organised only for administrative convenience. Then a number
of princely states merged with the newly independent Indian union. These
were joined to the existing provinces. This is what you see in the first map.
Since then boundaries of States have been reorganised many times. During this
entire period, not only did boundaries of States change, but in some cases, even
their names changed according to the wishes of the people of those States. Thus,
Mysore changed to Karnataka and Madras became Tamil Nadu. The maps show
these large scale changes that have taken place in the span of over seventy years.
In a way, these maps also tell us the story of functioning of federalism in India.
After studying this chapter you will be able to understand the following:
± what is Federalism;
± the federal provisions in the Indian Constitution;
± the issues involved  in the relations between the centre and the States; and
± the special provisions for certain States having a distinct composition and
historical features.

Chapter 7: Federalism
INDIA IN 1947

Chapter 7: Federalism
WHAT IS FEDERALISM?
USSR was one of the world’s super
powers, but after 1989 it simply
broke up into several independent
countries. One of the major
reasons for its break up was the
excessive centralisation and
concentration of power, and the
domination of Russia over other
regions 
with 
independent
languages and cultures of their
own e.g. Uzbekistan. Some other
countries like Czechoslovakia,
Yugoslavia, and Pakistan also had
to face a division of the country.
Canada came very close to a break
up between the English-speaking
and the French-speaking regions
of that country. Isn’t it a great
achievement that India, which
emerged as an independent
nation-state in 1947 after a painful
partition, has remained united over
seven decades of its independent
existence? What accounts for
this achievement? Can we attribute
it to the federal structure
of governance that we in
India adopted through our
Constitution? All the countries
mentioned above, were federations.
Yet they could not remain united.
Therefore, apart from adopting a
federal constitution, the nature of
that federal system and the
practice of federalism must also be
important factors.
Federalism in West Indies
You may have heard about
the cricket team of West
Indies. But is there a country
called West Indies?
Like India, West Indies
was also colonised by the
British. 
In 
1958, 
the
federation of West Indies
came into being. It had a
weak central government
and the economy of each unit
was independent. These
features 
and 
political
competition among the units
led to the formal dissolution
of 
the 
federation 
in
1962. Later, in 1973 by
Treaty 
of 
Chiguaramas
the independent islands
established joint authorities
in the form of a common
legislature, supreme court, a
common currency, and, to a
degree, a common market
known as the Caribbean
Community. The Caribbean
Community has even a
common executive, and
Heads of the governments of
member 
countries 
are
members of this executive.
Thus, the units could
neither live together as one
country, nor can they live
separately!

India is a land of continental proportions and immense
diversities. There are more than 20 major languages and
several hundred minor ones. It is the home of several major
religions. There are several million indigenous peoples
living in different parts of the country. In spite of all these
diversities we share a common land mass. We have also
participated in a common history, especially, when we
fought for independence. We also share many other
important features. This has led our national leaders to
visualise India as a country where there is unity in
diversity. Sometimes it is described as unity with diversity.
Federalism does not consist of a set of fixed principles,
which are applied, to different historical situations. Rather,
federalism as a principle of government has evolved
differently in different situations. American federalism –
one of the first major attempts to build a federal polity – is
different from German or Indian federalism. But there are
also a few key ideas and concepts associated with
federalism.
±
Essentially, federalism is an institutional mechanism
to accommodate two sets of polities—one at the
regional level and the other at the national level. Each
government is autonomous in its own sphere. In some
federal countries, there is even a system of dual
citizenship. India has only a single citizenship.
±
The people likewise, have two sets of identities and
loyalties—they belong to the region as well as the
nation, for example we are Gujaratis or Jharkhandis
as well as Indians. Each level of the polity has distinct
powers and responsibilities and has a separate system
of government.
±
The details of this dual system of government are
generally spelt out in a written constitution, which is
considered to be supreme and which is also the source
of the power of both sets of government. Certain
subjects, which concern the nation as a whole, for
example, defence or currency, are the responsibility
of the union or central government. Regional or local
I get it! It’s like our school. We
have our identity as students
of class XI or XII and so on.
And we also have competition
among the various divisions.
But we all belong to the school
and are proud of it.

table starts| The judiciary has the powers to resolve disputes | what we read
chapter: a
decides who
w much power. |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| between the central government and the States on legal matters about the division of power. Real politics, culture, ideology and history determine the actual working of a federation. A culture of trust, cooperation, mutual respect and restraint helps federations to function smoothly. Political parties also determine the way a constitution would work. If any single Yes, I remember what we re unit or State or linguistic group or ideology comes to in the first chapter: dominate the entire federation it could generate a deep constitution decides w resentment among people or its units not sharing the should have how much pow dominant voice. These situations could lead to demands for secession by the aggrieved units or could even result in civil wars. Many countries are embroiled in such conflict situations. | what we re chapter: decides w w much pow |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism
matters are the responsibility of the regional or State
government.

Federalism in Nigeria
If the regions and various communities do not trust each
other, even a federal arrangement can fail to produce unity.
The example of Nigeria is instructive:
Till 1914, Northern and Southern Nigeria were two
separate British colonies. At the Ibadan Constitutional
Conference of 1950 Nigerian leaders decided to form a
federal constitution.  The three major ethnic groups of
Nigeria—Yoruba, Ibo and Hausa-Fulani—controlled the
regions of the West, the East and the North respectively.
Their attempt to spread their influence to other regions
led to fears and conflicts. These led to a military regime.
In the 1960 constitution, both federal and regional
governments jointly controlled the Nigerian police. In the
military-supervised constitution of 1979, no state was
allowed to have any civil police.
Though democracy was restored in Nigeria in 1999,
religious differences along with conflicts over who will
control revenues from the oil resources continue to present
problems before the Nigerian federation. Local ethnic
communities resist centralised control of the oil resources.
Thus, Nigeria is an example of overlap of religious, ethnic
and economic differences among the units.
Check your progress
±
Who decides the powers of the central
government in a federation?
±
How are conflicts between the central
government and the States resolved in a
federation?

table starts| ours, it would be necessary to divide the powers between
provinces and the central government. There was also | rpose of living
e that all of us
ust make each |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| awareness that Indian society had regional diversity and linguistic diversity. This diversity needed recognition. People of different regions and languages had to share power and in each region, people of that region should govern themselves. This was only logical if we wanted a democratic government. The only question was what should be the extent of powers to be enjoyed by the regional governments. In view After all, the purpose of liv of the agitation of the Muslim League for greater together must be that all of representation to the Muslims, a compromise formula to are happy and must make e give very large powers to the regions was discussed during other be happy. the negotiations before Partition. Once the decision to partition India was taken, the Constituent Assembly decided to frame a government that would be based on the principles of unity and cooperation between the centre and the States and separate powers to the States. The most important feature of the federal system adopted by the Indian Constitution is the principle that relations between the States and the centre would be based on cooperation. Thus, while recognising diversity, the Constitution emphasised unity. Do you know for example, that the Constitution of India does not even mention the word federation? This is how the Constitution describes India — Article 1: (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States. (2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the | rpose of liv e that all of ust make e |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism

table starts|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | I feel that Sta very little mon How can the affairs? It is li where the mo husband and | constitutional status and clearly identified area of activity. If there is any dispute about which powers come under the control of the union and which under the States, this tes would have can be resolved by the Judiciary on the basis of the ey of their own. constitutional provisions. The Constitution clearly y manage their demarcates subjects, which are under the exclusive ke some families domain of the Union and those under the States. (Study ney is with the the chart given on the next page carefully. It shows how the wife has to |
|  | manage the ho | powers are distributed between the centre and the States.) usehold. One of the important aspects of this division of powers is |
| that economic and financial powers are centralised in the hands of the central government by the Constitution. The States have immense responsibilities but very meagre revenue sources. Check your progress ± Do you think that there is a need for mentioning Residuary powers separately? Why? ± Why do the States feel dissatisfied about the division of powers? 158 |  |  |

table ends


table starts|  | Constitution of India |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Union List State List Concurrent Includes subjects Includes subjects List like, like Includes ± Defence ± Agriculture subjects like, ± Atomic ± Police ± Education Energy ± Prison ± Transfer of ± Foreign ± Local Property Affairs Government other than ± War and ± Public Heath Agricultural Peace ± Land land ± Banking ± Liquor ± Forests ± Railways ± Trade and ± Trade ± Post and Commerce Unions Telegraph ± Livestock ± Adulteration ± Airways and Animal ± Adoption ± Ports Husbandry and ± Foreign Trade ± State Public Succession ± Currency & Services Coinage Both Union and Normally only the State Union Legislature State Legislature Legislature alone can make can make laws on alone can make laws on these these matters laws on these matters. matters. Residuary Powers Include all other matters not mentioned in any of the Lists. ± Cyber Laws Union Legislature alone has the power to legislate on such matters |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism

FEDERALISM WITH A STRONG CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
It is generally accepted that the Indian Constitution has created a
strong central government. India is a country of continental
dimensions with immense diversities and social problems. The
framers of the Constitution believed that we required a federal
constitution that would accommodate diversities. But they also
wanted to create a strong centre to stem disintegration and bring
about social and political change. It was necessary for the centre to
have such powers because India at the time of independence was
not only divided into provinces created by the British; but there were
more than 500 princely states which had to be integrated into existing
States or new States had to be created.
“Let me tell my honourable Friends
in the House that the drift… in all
constitutions has been towards the
centre... because of circumstances
that have now come into being
that the States have become,
...federal or unitary, welfare states
from being Police States and the
ultimate responsibility as for the
economic well-being of the country
has 
become 
the 
paramount
responsibility of the centre.”
T.T. Krishnamachari, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 955-956, 25 November 1949
Besides the concern for unity, the makers of the Constitution
also believed that the socio-economic problems of the country needed
to be handled by a strong central government in cooperation with
the States. Poverty, illiteracy and inequalities of wealth were some of
the problems that required planning and coordination. Thus, the
concerns for unity and development prompted the makers of the
Constitution to create a strong central government.
Let us look at the important provisions that create a strong central
government:

table starts| States…’. It can also alter the boundary of any State | and why our
not only about
others. It must
d federalism
r needs. |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| or even its name. The Constitution provides for some safeguards by way of securing the view of the concerned State legislature. ± The Constitution has certain very powerful emergency provisions, which can turn our federal polity into a highly centralised system once emergency is declared. During an emergency, power becomes lawfully centralised. Parliament also assumes the power to I now understand why make laws on subjects within the jurisdiction of Constitution is not only ab the States. borrowing from others. It m ± Even during normal circumstances, the central have designed federali government has very effective financial powers and according to our needs. responsibilities. In the first place, items generating revenue are under the control of the central government. Thus, the central government has many revenue sources and the States are mostly dependent on the grants and financial assistance from the centre. Secondly, India adopted planning as the instrument of rapid economic progress and development after independence. Planning led to considerable centralisation of economic decision making. Planning commission appointed by the union government is the coordinating machinery that controls and supervises the resources management of the States. Besides, the Union government uses its discretion to give grants and loans to States. This distribution of economic resources is considered lopsided and has led to charges of discrimination against States ruled by an opposition party. ± As you will study later, the Governor has certain | and why not only ab others. It m d federali r needs. |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism

has the power to reserve a bill passed by the State
legislature, for the assent of the President.  This gives
the central government an opportunity to delay the
State legislation and also to examine such bills and
veto them completely.
±
There may be occasions when the situation may
demand that the central government needs to legislate
on matters from the State list. This is possible if the
move is ratified by the Rajya Sabha. The Constitution
clearly states that executive powers of the centre are
superior to the executive powers of the States.
Furthermore, the central government may choose to
give instructions to the State government.
The following extract from an article of the Constitution
makes this clear.
Article 257 (1):  The executive
power of every State shall be so
exercised as not to impede or
prejudice the exercise of the
executive power of the Union, and
the executive power of the Union
shall extend to the giving of such
directions to a State as may
appear to the Government of India
to be necessary for that purpose.
±
You have already studied in the chapter on executive
that we have an integrated administrative system. The
all-India services are common to the entire territory of
India and officers chosen for these services serve in
the administration of the States. Thus, an IAS officer
who becomes the collector or an IPS officer who serves
as the Commissioner of Police, are under the control
of the central government. States can neither take
disciplinary action nor can they remove these officers
from service.
Oh! The central government
appears to me to be all-
powerful. Don’t the States
complain about it?

Chapter 7: Federalism
±
Articles 33 and 34 authorise the Parliament to protect persons in the
service of the union or a state in respect of any action taken by
them during martial law to maintain or restore order. This
provisions further strengthens the powers of the union government.
The Armed Forces Special Powers Act has been made on the basis
of these provisions. This Act has created tensions between the
people and the armed forces on some occasions.
Check your progress
±
Give two reasons for the claim that our
Constitution has a unitary bias.
±
Do you think that:
√
a strong centre makes the States weak?
√
strong States will weaken the centre?
CONFLICTS IN INDIA’S FEDERAL SYSTEM
In the previous section, we have seen that the Constitution has vested
very strong powers in the centre. Thus, the Constitution recognises
the separate identity of the regions and yet gives more powers to the
centre. Once the principle of identity of the State is accepted, it is
quite natural that the States would expect a greater role and powers
in the governance of the State and the country as a whole. This leads
to various demands from the States. From time to time, States have
demanded that they should be given more powers and more
autonomy. This leads to tensions and conflicts in the relations between
the centre and the States. While the legal disputes between the centre
and the States (or between States) can be resolved by the  judiciary,
demands for autonomy are of political nature and need to be resolved
through negotiations.
Centre-State Relations
The Constitution is only a framework or a skeleton, its flesh and
blood is provided by the actual processes of politics. Hence federalism

in India has to a large extent been influenced by the
changing nature of the political process. In the 1950s and
early 1960s the foundation of our federalism was laid
under Jawaharlal Nehru. It was also a period of Congress
dominance over the centre as well as the States. Except
on the issue of formation of new States, the relations
between the centre and the States remained quite normal
during this period. The States were hopeful that they would
be making progress with the help of the grants-in-aid from
the centre. Besides, there was considerable optimism
about the policies of socio-economic development designed
by the centre.
In the middle of the 1960s Congress dominance
declined somewhat and in a large number of States
opposition parties came to power. It resulted in demands
for greater powers and greater autonomy to the States. In
fact, these demands were a direct fallout of the fact that
different parties were ruling at the centre and in many
States. So, the State governments were protesting against
what they saw as unnecessary interference in their
governments by the Congress government at the centre.
The Congress too, was not very comfortable with the idea
of dealing with governments led by opposition parties.
This peculiar political context gave birth to a discussion
about the concept of autonomy under a federal system.
Finally, since the 1990s, Congress dominance has
largely ended and we have entered an era of coalition
politics especially at the centre. In the States too, different
parties, both national and regional, have come to power.
This has resulted in a greater say for the States, a respect
for diversity and the beginning of a more mature
federalism. Thus, it is in the second phase that the issue
of autonomy became very potent politically.
Demands for Autonomy
Many States and even many political parties have, from
time to time, demanded that States should have more
autonomy vis-à-vis the central government. However,
This is quite interesting. So, laws
and constitutions alone do not
decide everything. After all,
actual politics decides the nature
of our government!

table starts| more powers and important powers be assigned to the |  | hat Hindi is
language. But
friends from
of the country
ndi. |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| States. Many States (Tamil Nadu, Punjab, West Bengal) and many parties (DMK, Akali Dal, CPI-M) have made demands of autonomy from time to time. ± Another demand is that States should have independent sources of revenue and greater control over the resources. This is also known as financial autonomy. In 1977, the Left Front Government in West Bengal brought out a Yes, I know that Hindi document demanding a restructuring of centre-State India’s official language. B relations in India. In the autonomy demands of Tamil many of my friends fr Nadu and Punjab also, there was an implicit support to different parts of the coun the idea of greater financial powers. don’t know Hindi. ± The third aspect of the autonomy demands relates to administrative powers of the States. States resent the control of the centre over the administrative machinery. ± Fourthly, autonomy demands may also be R EAD A CARTOON related to cultural and linguistic issues. The opposition to the domination of Hindi (in Tamil Nadu) or demand for advancing the Punjabi language and culture are instances of this. Some States also feel that there is a domination of the Hindi-speaking areas over the others. In fact, during the decade of 18 September 1949 1960s, there were During discussion on the national language in th Constituent Assembly, Nehru had to appeal to the Hindi |  | hat Hindi language. B friends fr of the coun ndi. |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  | R EAD A CARTOON 18 Septem | ber 1949 |  |
|  | During discussion on the national langua Constituent Assembly, Nehru had to appeal to | ge in th the Hindi |  |
| agitations in some States against the imposition of speaking provinces to show greater toleranc others. Don’t spare me Shan the Hindi language. | speaking provinces to show greater toleranc others. Don’t spare me Shan |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

table starts|  |  | Role of Governors and President’s Rule
R
EAD A CARTOON The role of Governors has always been a
controversial issue between the States and
the central government. The Governor is not
an elected office-holder. Many Governors |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | R EAD A CARTOON |
| have been retired military officers or civil servants or politicians. Besides, the Governor is appointed by the central government and therefore, actions of the Governor are often viewed as interference by the Central government in the functioning of the State government. When two different parties are in power at the centre and the State, the role of the Governor becomes even more controversial. The Sarkaria Commission that was appointed by the central government (1983; it submitted its report in 1988) to 27 April 1952 examine the issues relating to centre-State “When Nehru was appointing relations, recommended that appointments governors, some were reluctant to of Governors should be strictly non-partisan. quit ministerial chairs.” Powers and role of the Governor become Don’t spare me Shankar, p.89 controversial for one more reason. One of the most controversial articles in the Constitution is Article 356, which provides for President’s rule in any State. This provision is to be applied, when ‘a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.’ It results in the takeover of the State government by the Union government. The President’s proclamation has to be ratified by Parliament. President’s rule can be extended till three years. The Governor has the power to recommend the dismissal of the State government and suspension or dissolution of State assembly. This has led to many conflicts. In some cases, State governments were dismissed even when they had a majority in the legislature, as had happened in Kerala in 1959 or without testing their majority, as 166 happened in several other States after 1967. Some cases went to the |  | 27 April 1952 |
|  | “When govern quit m | Nehru was appointing ors, some were reluctant to inisterial chairs.” Don’t spare me Shankar, p.89 |
|  |  |  |

table ends


table starts| n The Times of India. | R
EAD A CARTOON |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| centre. The centre has often i Laxman used this provision to dismiss State governments or has used K the office of the Governor to R prevent the majority party or coalition from assuming office. For instance, the central government removed elected governments in Andhra Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir in the decade of 1980s. Demands for New States The other dimension of tension Toppling the State governments. in our federal system has been Everyone loves to play this game! the demand to create new States. The national movement R EAD A CARTOON not only created a pan-Indian national unity; it also generated distinct unity around a common language, region and culture. Our national movement was also a movement for democracy. Therefore, in the course of the national movement itself, it was decided that as far as possible, States would be created on the basis of common cultural and |  |  |  |  |
|  | Toppling the State governments. Everyone loves to play this game! |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | R EAD A CARTOON |  |  |
| linguistic identity. 26 July This ultimately led to the Flood of demands for creating new State demand for the creation of |  | 26 July |  |  |
|  |  | Flood of demands for creating new State | s |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

linguistic States after Independence. In December 1953,
the States Reorganisation Commission was set up and it
recommended the creation of linguistic States, at least for
the major linguistic groups. In 1956, reorganisation of
some States took place. This saw the beginning of the
creation of linguistic States and the process is still
continuing. Gujarat and Maharashtra were created in
1960; Punjab and Haryana were separated from each other
in 1966. Later, the North Eastern region was reorganised
and new States like  Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were created.
Activity
Make a list of the States of India and find
out the year in which each of the States
was created.
In 2000, some of the larger States were further divided
both to meet the demands for a separate State as well as
to meet the need for greater administrative efficiency. Thus
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar were divided
to create three new States. They are: Chhattisgarh,
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand respectively. In 2014, the
State of Telangana was formed by dividing Andhra
Pradesh. Some regions and linguistic groups are still
struggling for separate Statehood like Vidarbha in
Maharashtra.
Interstate Conflicts
While the States keep fighting with the centre over
autonomy and other issues like the share in revenue
resources, there have been many instances of disputes
between two States or among more than two States. It is
true that the judiciary acts as the arbitration mechanism
on disputes of a legal nature but these disputes are in
reality not just legal. They have political implications and
therefore they can best be resolved only through
negotiations and mutual understanding.
So, federalism is all about
conflicts! First, we talked about
Centre-State conflicts and now
conflict among States. Can’t we
live together peacefully?

table starts| than one language. So, it is not easy to resolve this dispute
merely on the basis of linguistic majority. One of the long-
standing border disputes is the dispute between
Maharashtra and Karnataka over the city of Belgaum.
Manipur and Nagaland too, have a long-standing border
dispute. The carving out of Haryana from the erstwhile
State of Punjab has led to dispute between the two States
not only over border areas, but over the capital city of
Chandigarh. This city today houses the capital of both
these States. In 1985, the then Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi reached an understanding with the leadership of
Punjab. According to this understanding, Chandigarh
was to be handed over to Punjab. But this has not
happened yet.
While border disputes are more about sentiment, the
disputes over the sharing of river waters are even more
serious, because they are related to problems of drinking
water and agriculture in the concerned States. You might
have heard about the ‘Kaveri’ water dispute. This is a
major issue between Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Farmers
in both the States are dependent on Cauvery waters.
Though there is a river water tribunal to settle water
disputes, this dispute has reached the Supreme Court.
In another similar dispute Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra are battling over sharing the waters of
Narmada river. Rivers are a major resource and therefore,
disputes over river waters test the patience and cooperative
spirit of the States.
Activity Yes, conflict over Governo |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  | er Governo |  |
| Collect information about at least one over language, o dispute about river waters involving two over water… manage to live t or more States. |  |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 7: Federalism

SPECIAL PROVISIONS
The most extra-ordinary feature of the federal arrangement
created in India is that many States get a differential
treatment. We have already noted in the chapter on
Legislature that the size and population of each State being
different, an asymmetrical representation is provided in
the Rajya Sabha. While ensuring minimum representation
to each of the smaller States, this arrangement also
ensures that larger States would get more representation.
In the case of division of powers, too, the Constitution
provides a division of powers that is common to all the
States.  And yet, the Constitution has some special
provisions for some States given their peculiar social and
historical circumstances. Most of the special provisions
pertain to the north eastern States (Assam, Nagaland,
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, etc.) largely due to their
sizeable indigenous tribal population with a distinct
history and culture. However, these provisions have not
been able to stem alienation and the insurgency in parts
of the region. Special provisions also exist for hilly States
like Himachal Pradesh and some other States like Andhra
Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra Sikkim and
Telangana.
Jammu and Kashmir
The other State which had a special status was Jammu
and Kashmir (J&K) (Art. 370). Jammu and Kashmir was
one of the large princely States, which had the option of
joining India or Pakistan or remaining independent.
Check your progress
±
Why do States want more autonomy?
±
What is the difference between autonomy
and secession?
I now understand what they
meant by ‘intelligent and
balanced design’ in the first
chapter.

Chapter 7: Federalism
However, immediately after independence in October, 1947 Pakistan
sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced
the Maharaja Hari Singh to ask for Indian help and acceded to the
Indian Union.
Many of the Muslim majority areas in the Western and Eastern
parts joined Pakistan but J&K was an exception. Under these
circumstances, it was given much greater autonomy by the
Constitution. According to Article 370, the concurrence of the State
was required for making any laws in matters mentioned in the Union
and Concurrent lists. This was different from the position of other
states. In the case of the other States, the division of powers as listed
through three lists automatically applies. In the case of Jammu and
Kashmir, the central government had only limited powers and other
powers listed in the Union list and Concurrent list could be used
only with the consent of the State government. This gave greater
autonomy to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Earlier, there was a constitutional provision that allowed the
President, with the concurrence of the State government, to specify
which parts of the Union list should apply to the State. The President
had issued two Constitutional orders in concurrence with the
government of J&K making large parts of the Constitution applicable
to the State. As a result, though J&K had a separate constitution
and a flag, the Parliament’s power to make laws on subjects in the
Union List was fully accepted.
The remaining difference between the other States and the State
of J&K were that no emergency due to internal disturbances could
be declared in J&K without the concurrence of the State. The Union
government could not impose a financial emergency in the State and
the Directive Principles did not apply in J&K. Amendments to the
Indian Constitution (under Art. 368) could apply in concurrence
with the government of J&K.
At present, the special status given under 370 no longer exists.
By the Jammu and Kashmir reorganisation Act 2019, the State has
been bifurcated into two Union Territories viz., (i) Jammu and
Kashmir and (ii) Ladakh. The new arrangement has come into effect
from 31 October, 2019.

Conclusion
Federalism is like a rainbow, where each colour is separate, yet
together they make a harmonious pattern. Federalism has to
continuously maintain a difficult balance between the centre
and the States. No legal or institutional formula can guarantee
the smooth functioning of a federal polity. Ultimately, the people
and the political process must develop a culture and a set of
values and virtues like mutual trust, toleration and a spirit of
cooperation. Federalism celebrates both unity as well as
diversity. National unity cannot be built by streamlining
differences. Such forced unity only generates greater social strife
and alienation and tends finally to destroy unity. A responsive
polity sensitive to diversities and to the demands for autonomy
can alone be the basis of a cooperative federation.