Citizenship
Citizenship implies full and equal membership of a political community. In this
chapter we will explore what exactly this means today. In Sections 6.2 and 6.3 we
will look at some debates and struggles which are going on regarding the interpretation
of the term ‘full and equal membership’. Section 6.4 will discuss the relationship
between citizens and the nation and the criteria of citizenship adopted in different
countries. Theories of democratic citizenship claim that citizenship should be
universal. Does this mean that every person today should be accepted as a member
of one or other state? then How can we explain the existence of so many stateless
people? This issue will be discussed in Section 6.5. The last section 6.6 will discuss
the issue of global citizenship. Does it exist and could it replace national citizenship?
After going through this chapter you should be able to
o
explain the meaning of citizenship, and
o
discuss some of the areas in which that meaning is being expanded or
challenged  today.
Overview

6.1 INTRODUCTION
Citizenship has been defined as full and
equal membership of a political community.
In the contemporary world, states provide a
collective political identity to their members
as well as certain rights. Therefore we think
of ourselves as Indians, or Japanese, or
Germans, depending on the state to which
we belong. Citizens expect certain rights
from their state as well as help and
protection wherever they may travel.
The importance of full membership of a state can be
appreciated if we think of the condition of the thousands of people
in the world who have the bad fortune to be forced to live as
refugees or illegal migrants because no state is willing to grant
them membership. Such people are not guaranteed rights by any
state and generally live in precarious conditions. For them full
membership of a state of their choice is a goal for which they are
willing to struggle, as we see today with Palestinian refugees in
the Middle East.
The precise
nature of the
rights granted to
citizens 
may
vary from state
to state but in
most democratic
countries today
they would include
some 
political
rights like the right
to vote, civil rights
like the freedom of speech or belief, and some socio-economic rights
which could include the right to a minimum wage, or the right to
education. Equality of rights and status is one of the basic rights
of citizenship.

COnsider the French Revolution in 1789. In the colonies
of Asia and Africa, demands for equal citizenship
were part of their struggle for independence
colonial rulers. In South Africa, the black
population had to undertake a long
struggle against the ruling white minority for
equal citizenship. This continued until the early
90s. Struggles to achieve full membership and
equal rights continue even now in many parts of the world. You
have read about the women’s movement and the dalit movement
in our country. Their purpose is to change public opinion by drawing
attention to their needs as well as to influence government policy to
ensure them equal rights and opportunities.

LET’S THINK
During seventeenth to twentieth century, white people of
Europe established their rule over the black people in
South Africa. Read the following description about the
policy practices in South Africa till 1994.
The whites had the right to vote, contest elections
and elect government; they were free to purchase property
and go to any place in the country. Blacks did not have
such rights. Separate colonies for whites and blacks were
established. The blacks had to take ‘passes’ to work in
white neighbourhoods. They were not allowed to keep their
families in the white areas. The schools were also separate
for the people of different colour.


However, citizenship is about more than
relationship between states and their member
is also about citizen-citizen relations and invo
certain obligations of citizens to each other an
the society. These would include not just the
obligations imposed by states but also a medical care or education, and natural resources like land or water, are limited, demands may be made to res entry to ‘outsiders’ even though they may be fellow citizens. You remember the slogan ‘Mumbai for Mumbaikars’ which expres such feelings. Many similar struggles have taken place in diffe parts of India and the world. | intended to help others, or improve the area, or protect the environment. List some of the activities which could be undertaken by young people of your age- group. |  |


This raises questions about what ‘full and equal membership’
really means? Does it mean that citizens should enjoy equal rights
The 1950s witnessed the emergence of Civil Rights Movements against inequalities that existed between black and white populations in many of the southern states of the USA. Such |  |  |
| ghts and facilities? In this section we will xplore the meaning of itizenship by focusing on he first of these questions. One of the rights ranted to citizens in our ountry, and in many thers, is freedom of ovement. This right is of articular importance for orkers. Labour tends to igrate in search of jobs hen opportunities are not vailable near their homes. ome people may even ravel outside the country n search of jobs. Markets or skilled and unskilled orkers have developed in ifferent parts of our ountry. For instance, I.T. orkers may flock to owns like Bangalore. urses from Kerala may e found all over the ountry. The booming | inequalities were maintained in these states by a set of laws called Segregation Laws through which the black people were denied many civil and political rights. These laws created separate areas for coloured and white people in various civic amenities like railways, buses, theatres, housing, hotels, restaurants, etc. Martin Luther King Jr. was a black leader of the movement against these laws. King gave many arguments against the prevailing laws of segregation. First, in terms of self-worth and dignity every human person in the world is equal regardless of one’s race or colour. Second, King argued that segregation is like ‘social leprosy’ on the body politic because it inflicts deep psychological wounds on the people who suffer as a result of such laws. King argued that the practice of segregation diminishes the quality of life for the white community also. He illustrates this point by examples. The white community, instead of allowing the black people to enter some community parks as was directed by the court, decided to close them. Similarly, some baseball teams had to be disbanded, as the authorities did not want to accept black players. Thirdly, the segregation laws create artificial boundaries between people and prevent them from cooperating with each other for the overall benefit of the country. For these reasons, King argued that these laws should be abolished. He gave a call for peaceful and non-violent resistance.

You
may have come across workers from different regions near your
home or school.
However, often resistance builds up among the local people
against so many jobs going to people from outside the area,
sometimes at lower wages. A demand may develop to restrict certain
jobs to those who belong to the state, or those who know the local
language. Political parties may take up the issue. Resistance could
even take the form of organised violence against ‘outsiders’. Almost
every region of India has experienced such movements. Are such
movements ever justified?
We all become indignant, if Indian workers in other countries
are ill-treated by the local population. Some of us may also feel
that skilled and educated workers have the right to migrate for
work. States may even be proud of their ability to attract such
workers. But if jobs are scarce in a region, local residents may
resent competition from ‘outsiders’. Does the right to freedom of
movement include the right to live or work in any part of the country?
Another factor that we need to consider is that there may
sometimes be a difference between our response to poor migrants
and to skilled migrants. We may not always be as welcoming to
poor migrants who move into our areas as we may be to skilled and
affluent workers. This raises the question of whether poor and
unskilled workers should have the same right to live and work
anywhere in the country as do skilled workers? These are some of
the issues which are being debated in our country today regarding
‘full and equal membership’ for all citizens of the country.
However, disputes may sometimes arise even in democratic
societies. How can such disputes be resolved? The right to protest
is an aspect of the freedom of expression guaranteed to citizens in
our Constitution, provided protest does not harm the life or property
of other people or the State. Citizens are free to try and influence
public opinion and government policy by forming groups, holding
demonstrations, using the media, appealing to political parties, or
by approaching the courts. This is one of the obligations of citizenship.

LET’S THINK
Examine the arguments for and against freedom of
movement and occupation throughout the country for
citizens.
Should the long-term inhabitants of a region enjoy
preference for jobs and facilities?
Or, should states be allowed to fix quotas for
admissions to professional colleges for students who do
not belong to that state?

6.3 EQUAL RIGHTS
In this section we will examine another aspect of citizenship,
is, the issue of whether full and equal membership means tha
citizens, rich or poor, should be guaranteed certain basic ri
and a minimum standard of living by the state. To discuss
issue, we will look at one set of people, that is the urban p
Dealing with the problem of the poor in towns is one of the ur
problems facing the government today.
There is a large population of slum-dwellers and squatter
every city in India. Although they may do necessary and us
work, often at low wages, they are often viewed as unwelcome visi
by the rest of the town population. They may be blamed for strai
the resources of the city or for spreading crime and disease.

CITIZENSHIP, EQUALITY AND RIGHTS |
Citizenship is not merely a legal concept. It is also closely related to larger notions of equality and rights. A widely accepted formulation of this relationship was provided by the British sociologist, T. H. Marshall (1893-1981). In his book Citizenship and Social Class (1950), Marshall defined citizenship as “a status bestowed on those who are full members of a community. All who possess the status are equal with respect to the rights and duties with which the status is endowed.” The key concept in Marshall’s idea of citizenship is that of ‘equality’. This implies two things: first, that quality of the given rights and duties improves. Second, that the quantity of people upon whom they are bestowed grows. Marshall sees citizenship as involving three kinds of rights: civil, political and social. Civil rights protect the individual’s life, liberty and property. Political rights enable the individual to participate in the process of governance. Social rights give the individual access to education and employment. Together they make it possible for the citizen to lead a life of dignity. Marshall saw social class as a ‘system of inequality’. Citizenship ensures equality by countering the divisive effects of class hierarchy. It thus facilitates the creation of a better-integrated and harmonious community.
In his book Citizenship and Social Class (1950), Marshall etty traders, defined citizenship as “a status bestowed on those who cavengers, or are full members of a community. All who possess the omestic workers, status are equal with respect to the rights and duties lumbers, or with which the status is endowed.” echanics, among The key concept in Marshall’s idea of citizenship is ther professions. that of ‘equality’. This implies two things: first, that mall businesses quality of the given rights and duties improves. Second, uch as cane that the quantity of people upon whom they are eaving, or textile bestowed grows. rinting, or Marshall sees citizenship as involving three kinds ailoring, may also of rights: civil, political and social. evelop in slums. Civil rights protect the individual’s life, liberty and he city probably property. Political rights enable the individual to participate in the process of governance. Social rights give the pends relatively individual access to education and employment. Together ttle on providing they make it possible for the citizen to lead a life of dignity. lum-dwellers with Marshall saw social class as a ‘system of inequality’. ervices such as Citizenship ensures equality by countering the divisive anitation or water effects of class hierarchy. It thus facilitates the creation upply. of a better-integrated and harmonious community. Awareness about the condition of the urban poor is growing mong governments, N.G.O’s and other agencies, and among the lum-dwellers themselves. For instance, a national policy on urban treet vendors was framed in January 2004. There are lakhs of treet vendors in big cities and they often face harassment from he police and town authorities. The policy was intended to provide ecognition and regulation for vendors to enable them to carry on heir profession without harassment so long as they obeyed overnment regulations. | In his book Citizenship and Social Class (1950), Marshall defined citizenship as “a status bestowed on those who are full members of a community. All who possess the status are equal with respect to the rights and duties with which the status is endowed.” The key concept in Marshall’s idea of citizenship is that of ‘equality’. This implies two things: first, that quality of the given rights and duties improves. Second, that the quantity of people upon whom they are bestowed grows. Marshall sees citizenship as involving three kinds of rights: civil, political and social. Civil rights protect the individual’s life, liberty and property. Political rights enable the individual to participate in the process of governance. Social rights give the individual access to education and employment. Together they make it possible for the citizen to lead a life of dignity. Marshall saw social class as a ‘system of inequality’. Citizenship ensures equality by countering the divisive effects of class hierarchy. It thus facilitates the creation of a better-integrated and harmonious community.

CITIZENSHIP, EQUALITY AND RIGHTS
The Supreme Court gave an important right to vote may be difficult
decision regarding the rights of slum-dwellers for them to exercise beca
in Bombay in response to a Public Interest to be included in the lis
Litigation filed by a social activist, Olga Tellis voters a fixed addres
against Bombay Municipal Corporation in required and squatters
1985. The petition claimed the right to live
pavement dwellers may find
on pavements or in slums because there was
difficult to provide this.
no alternative accommodation available close
to their place of work. If they were forced to Among other group
move they would lose their livelihood as well. people who are becom
The Supreme Court said, “Article 21 of the marginalised in our society
Constitution which guaranteed the right to the tribal people and fo
life included the right to livelihood. Therefore
dwellers. These people
if pavement dwellers were to be evicted they
dependent on access to for
should first be provided alternative
and other natural resource
accommodation under the right to shelter.”
maintain their way of life. Many
of them face threats to their
of life and livelihood becau
the pressure of increasing populations and the search for land
resources to maintain them. Pressures from commercial interests
wanting to mine the resources which may exist in forests
imposes another threat to the way of life and livelihood of forest dwel
and tribal peoples, as does the tourist industry. Governments
struggling with the problem of how to protect these people and t
habitat without at the same time endangering development of
country. This is an issue that affects all citizens, not just tribal people.
To try and ensure equal rights and opportunities for all citizens
cannot be a simple matter for any government. Different group
people may have different needs and problems and the right
one group may conflict with the rights of another. 

The Supreme Court gave an important decision regarding the rights of slum-dwellers in Bombay in response to a Public Interest Litigation filed by a social activist, Olga Tellis
against Bombay Municipal Corporation in required and squatters 1985. The petition claimed the right to live pavement dwellers may fin on pavements or in slums because there was difficult to provide this. no alternative accommodation available close to their place of work. If they were forced to Among other group move they would lose their livelihood as well. people who are becom The Supreme Court said, “Article 21 of the marginalised in our society Constitution which guaranteed the right to the tribal people and fo life included the right to livelihood. Therefore dwellers. These people if pavement dwellers were to be evicted they dependent on access to for should first be provided alternative and other natural resource accommodation under the right to shelter.” maintain their way of life. M of them face threats to their of life and livelihood becau the pressure of increasing populations and the search for land resources to maintain them. Pressures from commercial inter wanting to mine the resources which may exist in forests or co poses another threat to the way of life and livelihood of forest dwel and tribal peoples, as does the tourist industry. Governments struggling with the problem of how to protect these people and t habitat without at the same time endangering development of country. This is an issue that affects all citizens, not just tribal peo To try and ensure equal rights and opportunities for all citiz cannot be a simple matter for any government. Different group people may have different needs and problems and the right one group may conflict with the rights of another. Equal rights citizens need not mean that uniform policies have to be applie all people since different groups of people may have different ne If the purpose is not just to make policies which would apply in | against Bombay Municipal Corporation in 1985. The petition claimed the right to live on pavements or in slums because there was no alternative accommodation available close to their place of work. If they were forced to move they would lose their livelihood as well. The Supreme Court said, “Article 21 of the Constitution which guaranteed the right to life included the right to livelihood. Therefore if pavement dwellers were to be evicted they should first be provided alternative accommodation under the right to shelter.”

Find
uld mean that providing equal rights and protection
out details about their
ll citizens should be one of the guiding principles
life. Where is their
overnment policies. ancestral place? When
and why did they
come here? Where do

While tracing the history of
land ownership, it is very obvious that a
century ago the whites had taken the Find out about
fertile land from the native people. Whites the street vendors
have now been in Zimbabwe for (Protection of
generations and consider themselves as Livelihood and
Zimbabweans. The total population of Regulation of
whites in Zimbabwe is just 0.06 per cent Street Vending)
of the population. In the year 1997, Act, 2014.
the President of Zimbabwe, Mugabe
announced the plans to take over around
1500 farms.According to the official figures published about the land distribution in Zimbabwe, some 4,400 white families owned 32 per cent of agricultural land that is about 10m hectares. About one million black peasant families own just 16m hectares that is the 38 per cent of the land. While the land that is with the white families is fertile and irrigated, the land in the hands of black population is less fertile and unirrigated. While tracing the history of land ownership, it is very obvious that a century ago the whites had taken the fertile land from the native people. Whites have now been in Zimbabwe for generations and consider themselves as Zimbabweans. The total population of whites in Zimbabwe is just 0.06 per cent of the population. In the year 1997, the President of Zimbabwe, Mugabe announced the plans to take over around 1500 farms. What ideas from citizenship would you use to support or oppose the claims of Black and White Citizens of Zimbabwe? | According to the official figures published about the land distribution in Zimbabwe, some 4,400 white families owned 32 per cent of agricultural land that is about 10m hectares. About one million black peasant families own just 16m hectares that is the 38 per cent of the land. While the land that is with the white families is fertile and irrigated, the land in the hands of black population is less fertile and unirrigated. While tracing the history of land ownership, it is very obvious that a century ago the whites had taken the fertile land from the native people. Whites have now been in Zimbabwe for generations and consider themselves as Zimbabweans. The total population of whites in Zimbabwe is just 0.06 per cent of the population. In the year 1997, the President of Zimbabwe, Mugabe announced the plans to take over around 1500 farms. |  |  |

6.4 CITIZEN AND NATION
The concept of nation state evolved in the modern period. One of
the earliest assertions regarding the sovereignty of the nation state
and democratic rights of citizens was made by the revolutionaries
in France in 1789. Nation states claim that their boundaries define
not just a territory but also a unique culture and shared history.
The national identity may be expressed through symbols like a flag,
national anthem, national language, or certain ceremonial practices,
among other things.
Most modern states include people of different religions,
languages, and cultural traditions. But the national identity of a
democratic state is supposed to provide citizens with a political
identity that can be shared by all the members of the state.
Democratic states usually try to define their identity so that it is as
inclusive as possible — that is, which allows all citizens to identify
themselves as part of the nation. But in practice, most countries
tend to define their identity in a way which makes it easier for some
citizens to identify with the state than others. It may also make it
easier for the state to extend citizenship to some people and not
others. This would be as true of the United States, which prides
itself on being a country of immigrants, as any other country.
France, for instance, is a country which claims to be both secular
and inclusive. It includes not only people of European origin but
also citizens who originally came from other areas such as North
Africa. Culture and language are important features of its national
identity and all citizens are expected to assimilate into it in the
public aspects of their lives. They may, however, retain their personal
beliefs and practices in their private lives. This may seem like a
reasonable policy but it is not always simple to define what is public
and what is private and this has given rise to some controversies.
Religious belief is supposed to belong to the private sphere of citizens
but sometimes religious symbols and practices may enter into their
public lives. You may have heard about the demand of Sikh school
boys in France to wear the turban to school, and of Muslim girls to
wear the head scarf with their school uniforms. This was disallowed
by some schools on the ground that it involved bringing religious
symbols into the public sphere of state education. Those whose
religions did not demand such practices naturally did not face the
same problem. Clearly, assimilation into the national culture would
be easier for some groups than for others.
The criteria for granting citizenship to new applicants varies
from country to country. In countries such as Israel, or Germany,
factors like religion, or ethnic origin, may be given priority when
granting citizenship. In Germany there has been a persistent demand
from Turkish workers, who were at one time encouraged to come
and work in Germany, that their children who have been born and
brought up in Germany should automatically be granted citizenship.
This is still being debated. These are only a few examples of the
kinds of restrictions which may be placed on citizenship even in
democratic countries which pride themselves on being inclusive.
India defines itself as a secular, democratic, nation state. The
movement for independence was a broad based one and deliberate
attempts were made to bind together people of different religions,
regions and cultures. True, Partition of the country did take place
in 1947 when differences with the Muslim League could not be
resolved, but this only strengthened the resolve of Indian national
leaders to maintain the secular and inclusive character of the Indian
nation state they were committed to build. This resolve was embodied
in the Constitution.
The Indian Constitution attempted to accommodate a very diverse
society. To mention just a few of these diversities, it attempted to
provide full and equal citizenship to groups as different as the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, many women who had not
previously enjoyed equal rights, some remote communities in the
Andaman and Nicobar islands who had had little contact with modern
civilization, and many others. It also attempted to find a place for the
different languages, religions and practices found in different parts of
the country. It had to provide equal rights to all without at the same
time forcing people to give up their personal beliefs, languages or
cultural practices. It was therefore a unique experiment which was
undertaken through the Constitution. 



Delhi symbolises the attempt of the state to include
people of different regions, cultures and religions.

We often assume that full membership of a state should be
available to all those who ordinarily live and work in the country as
well as to those who apply for citizenship. But although many states
may support the idea of universal and inclusive citizenship, each of
them also fixes criteria for the grant of citizenship. These would
generally be written into the Constitution and laws of the country.
States use their power to keep unwanted visitors out.
However, in spite of restrictions, even the building of walls or
fences, considerable migration of peoples still takes place in the
world. People may be displaced by wars, or persecution, famine, or
other reasons. If no state is willing to accept them and they cannot
return home, they become stateless peoples or refugees. They may
be forced to live in camps, or as illegal migrants. Often they cannot
legally work, or educate their children, or acquire property. The
problem is so great that the U.N. has appointed a High Commissioner
for Refugees to try to help them.
Decisions regarding how many people can be absorbed as citizens
in a country poses a difficult humanitarian and political problem for
many states. Many countries have a policy of accepting those fleeing
from persecution or war. But they may not want to accept
unmanageable number of people or expose the country to security
risks. India prides itself on providing refuge to persecuted peoples,
as it did with the Dalai Lama and his followers in 1959. Entry of
people from neighbouring countries has taken place along all the
borders of the Indian state and the process continues. Many of these
people remain as stateless peoples for many years or generations,
living in camps, or as illegal migrants. Only a relatively few of them
are eventually granted citizenship. Such problems pose a challenge
to the promise of democratic citizenship which is that the rights and
identity of citizen would be available to all people in the contemporary
world. Although many people cannot achieve citizenship of a state of
their choice, no alternative identity exists for them.
The problem of stateless people is an important one confronting
the world today. Borders of states are still being redefined by war
or political disputes and for the people caught up in such disputes
the consequences may be severe. Supporters of global citizenship argue that although a world
community and global society does not yet exist, people already feel
linked to each other across national boundaries. They would say that
the outpouring of help from all parts of the world for victims of the
Asian tsunami and other major calamities is a sign of the emergence
of a global society. They feel that we should try to strengthen this
feeling and work towards a concept of global citizenship.
The concept of national citizenship assumes that our state can
provide us with the protection and rights which we need to live
with dignity in the world today. But states today are faced with
many problems which they cannot tackle by themselves. In this
situation are individual rights, guaranteed by the state, sufficient
to protect the freedom of people today? Or has the time come to
move to a concept of human rights and global citizenship?
One of the attractions of the notion of global citizenship is that
it might make it easier to deal with problems which extend across
national boundaries and which therefore need cooperative action
by the people and governments of many states. For instance, it
might make it easier to find an acceptable solution to the issue of
migrants and stateless peoples, or at least to ensure them basic
rights and protection regardless of the country in which they may
be living.