Social Justice
Overview
Just as we intuitively understand what love means even if we cannot explain all its
different shades of meaning, we also have an intuitive understanding of justice even
though we may not be able to define it precisely. In that sense justice is a lot like love.
In addition, both love and justice evoke passionate responses from their advocates.
And as with love, no one hates justice, everyone wants justice for oneself and to some
extent for others also. But unlike love, which is an aspect of our relationships with a
few people whom we know well, justice concerns our life in society, the way in which
public life is ordered and the principles according to which social goods and social
duties are distributed among different members of society. As such, questions of
justice are of central importance for politics.
After going through this chapter you should be able to:
o
Identify some of the principles of justice which have been put forward in different
societies and at different periods of time.
o
Explain what is meant by distributive justice.
o
Discuss John Rawls’ argument that a fair and just society would be in the interest
of all members and could be defended on rational grounds.

dharma and maintaining dharma or a just social order,
considered to be a primary duty of kings. In China, Confucius,
famous philosopher argued that kings should maintain justic
punishing wrong doers and rewarding the virtuous. In fourth century
B.C. Athens (Greece), Plato discussed issues of justice in his
The Republic. Through a long dialogue between Socrates and
young friends, Glaucon and Adeimantus, Plato examined why we
should be concerned about justice. The young people ask Socrates
why we should be just. They observe that people who were unjust
seemed to be much better off than those
were just. Those who twisted rules to serve
“They say that to do
injustice is, by nature, interests, avoided paying taxes
to suffer injustice, to lie and be deceitful, were often more succes
evil; but that the evil is than those who were truthful and just. If
greater than the good. And were smart enough to avoid being caught.
You may have heard people talk about
injustice and have had
expressing similar sentiments even today.
experience of both, not
being able to avoid the one Socrates reminds these young people
and obtain the other, they if everyone were to be unjust, if every
think that they had
manipulated rules to suit their own intere
better agree among
no one could be sure of benefiting from injus
themselves to have
Nobody would be secure and this was likel
neither; hence there
harm all of them. Hence, it is in our own lo
arise laws and mutual
term interest to obey the laws and be j
covenants; and that
which is ordained by law Socrates clarified that we need to underst
is termed by them lawful clearly what justice means in order to fig
and just.” out why it is important to be just.

4.1 WHAT IS JUSTICE?
Ensuring the well-being of the people includes giving
each person his due.
The idea that justice involves giving each person his due continues
to be an important part of our present day understanding of justice.
However, our understanding of what is due to a person has changed
from the time of Plato. Today, our understanding of what is just is
closely linked to our understanding of what is due to each person as
a human being. According to the German philosopher Immanuel
Kant, human beings possess dignity. If all persons are granted dignity
then what is due to each of them is that they have the opportunity to
develop their talents and pursue their chosen goals.  Justice requires
that we give due and equal consideration to all individuals.

Equal Treatment for Equals
Although there might be broad agreement in modern society about
the equal importance of all people, it is not a simple matter to decide
how to give each person his/her due.  A number of different principles
have been put forward in this regard. One of the principles is the
principle of treating equals equally. It is considered that all individuals
share certain characteristics as human beings. Therefore they deserve
equal rights and equal treatment. Some of the important rights which
are granted in most liberal democracies today include civil rights
such as the rights of life, liberty and property, political rights like the
right to vote, which enable people to participate in political processes,
and certain social rights which would include the right to enjoy equal
opportunities with other members of the society.
Apart from equal rights, the principle of treating equals equally
would require that people should not be discriminated against on
grounds of class, caste, race or gender. They should be judged on
the basis of their work and actions and not on the basis of the
group to which they belong. Therefore, if two persons from different
castes perform the same kind of work, whether it be breaking stones
or delivering Pizzas, they should receive the same kind of reward. If
a person gets one hundred rupees for some work and another receives
only seventy five rupees for the same work because they belong to

Justice Social Justice
Political Theory
different castes, then it would be unfair or unjust. Similarly, if a male
teacher in a school gets a higher salary than a female teacher, then
this difference would also be unjustifiable and wrong.
Proportionate Justice
However, equal treatment is not the only principle of justice. There
could be circumstances in which we might feel that treating
everybody equally would be unjust.  How, for instance, would you
react if it was decided in your school that all those who did an exam
should get equal marks because they are all students of the same
school and did the same exam? Here you might think it would be
more fair if students were awarded marks according to the quality
of their answer papers and also, possibly, the degree of effort they
had put in. In other words, provided everybody starts from the same
base line of equal rights, justice in such cases would mean rewarding
people in proportion to the scale and quality of their effort. Most
people would agree that although people should get the same reward
for the same work, it would be fair and just to reward different
kinds of work differently if we take into account factors such as the
effort required, the skills required, the possible dangers involved in
that work, and so on. If we use these criteria we may find that
certain kinds of workers in our society are not paid a wage which
takes such factors sufficiently into account. For instance, miners,
skilled craftsmen, or people in sometimes dangerous but socially
useful professions like policemen, may not always get a reward
which is just if we compare it to what some others in society may be
earning. For justice in society, the principle of equal treatment needs
to be balanced with the principle of proportionality.
Recognition of Special Needs
A third principle of justice which we recognise is for a society to take
into account special needs of people while distributing rewards or
duties. This would be considered a way of promoting social justice.
In terms of their basic status and rights as members of the society
justice may require that people be treated equally. But even non-
discrimination between people and rewarding them proportionately
to their efforts might not be enough to ensure that people enjoy
equality in other aspects of their lives in society nor that the society

Examine the following situations and discuss whether
they are just. In each case discuss the principle of justice
that might be used in defence of your argument.
o Suresh, a visually impaired student, gets three hours
and thirty minutes to finish his mathematics paper,
while the rest of the class gets only three hours.
o Geeta walks with a limp. The teacher decided to
give her also three hours and thirty minutes to
finish her mathematics paper.
o A teacher gives grace marks to the weaker students
in class, to boost their morale.
o A professor distributes different question papers
to different students based on her evaluation of
their capabilities.
o There is a proposal to reserve 33 per cent of the
seats in the Parliament for women.
People with special needs or disabilities could be considered
unequal in some particular respect and deserving of special help.
But it is not always easy to get agreement regarding which inequalities
of people should be recognised for providing them special help.
Physical disabilities, age or lack of access to good education or health
care, are some of the factors which are considered grounds for special
treatment in many countries. 

The principle of taking account of the special needs
of people does not necessarily contradict the principle of equal
treatment so much as extend it because the principle of treating
equals equally could imply that people who are not equal in certain
important respects could be treated differently.
Why is the statue of justice blindfolded?
She is blindfolded
because she needs
to be impartial.
Of course she needs to be impartial.
But I wonder how then does she see
the special needs of people? 
The Constitution therefore
allowed for reservations of government jobs and quotas for admissions
to educational institutions for people belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and Tribes.

If there are serious economic
or social inequalities in a society, it might become necessary to try
and redistribute some of the important resources of the society to
provide something like a level playing field for citizens. Therefore,
within a country social justice would require not only that people
be treated equally in terms of the laws and policies of the society
but also that they enjoy some basic equality of life conditions and
opportunities. This is seen as necessary for each person to be able
to pursue his/her objectives and express himself. In our country
for instance, the Constitution abolished the practice of
untouchability to promote social equality and ensure that people
belonging to ‘lower’ castes have access to temples, jobs and basic
necessities like water. Different state governments have also taken
some measures to redistribute important resources like land in a
more fair manner by instituting land reforms.
Differences of opinion on matters such whether, and how, to
distribute resources and ensure equal access to education and jobs
arouse fierce passions in society and even sometimes provoke
violence. People believe the future of themselves and their families
may be at stake.  We have only to remind ourselves about the anger
and even violence which has sometimes been roused by proposals
to reserve seats in educational institutions or in government
employment in our country. As students of political theory however
we should be able to calmly examine the issues involved in terms of
our understanding of the principles of justice. Can schemes to help
the disadvantaged be justified in terms of a theory of justice? In the
next section, we will discuss the theory of just distribution put forward
by the well-known political philosopher, John Rawls. Rawls has
argued that there could indeed be a rational justification for
acknowledging the need to provide help to the least privileged
members of a society.

4.3 JOHN RAWLS’ THEORY OF JUSTICE
If people are asked to chose the kind of society in which they would
like to live, they are likely to chose one in which the rules and
organisation of society allot them a privileged position. We cannot
expect everyone to put aside their personal interests and think of

Justice Social Justice
Political Theory
the good of society, especially if they believe that their decision is
going to have an impact on the kind of life and opportunities their
children will have in the future. Indeed, we often expect parents to
think of and support what is best for their children. But such
perspectives cannot form the basis of a theory of justice for a society.
So how do we reach a decision that would be both fair and just?
John Rawls has tried to answer this question. He argues that
the only way we can arrive at a fair and just rule is if we imagine
ourselves to be in a situation in which we have to make decisions
about how society should be organised although we do not know
which position we would ourselves occupy in that society. That is,
we do not know what kind of family we would be born in, whether
we would be born into an ‘upper’ caste or ‘lower’ caste family,  rich
or poor, privileged or disadvantaged. Rawls argues that if we do not
know, in this sense, who we will be and what options would be
available to us in the future society, we will be likely to support a
decision about the rules and organisation of that future society which
would be fair for all the members.
Rawls describes this as thinking under a ‘veil of ignorance’. He
expects that in such a situation of complete ignorance about our
possible position and status in society, each person would decide in
the way they generally do, that is, in terms of their own interests.
But since no one knows who he would be, and what is going to
benefit him, each will envisage the future society from the point of
view of the worst-off.  It will be clear to a person who can reason and
think for himself, that those who are born privileged will enjoy certain
special opportunities. But, what if they have the misfortune of being
born in a disadvantaged section of society where few opportunities
would be available to them? Hence, it would make sense for each
person, acting in his or her own interest, to try to think of rules of
organisation that will ensure reasonable opportunities to the weaker
sections. The attempt will be to see that important resources, like
education, health, shelter, etc., are available to all persons, even if
they are not part of the upper class.
It is of course not easy to erase our identities and to imagine
oneself under a veil of ignorance. 

If in a society deep and persistent divisions exist between those
enjoy greater wealth and property, and the power which goes
Do such ownership, and those who are excluded and deprived
would say that social justice is lacking there. We are not tal
S DO IT here merely about the different standards of living which ma
enjoyed by different individuals in a society. Justice does
rious calculations require absolute equality and sameness in the way in w
the minimum people live. But a society would be considered unjust if
quirements of
differences between rich and poor are so great that they see
d, income, water
be living in different worlds altogether, and if the relati
d such facilities
deprived have no chance at all to improve their condition how
ve been made
hard they may work. In other words, a just society should pro
government
encies and U.N. people with the basic minimum conditions to enable them to
encies. Search healthy and secure lives and develop their talents as well as e
your school opportunities to pursue their chosen goals in society.
rary, or on the
How can we decide what are the basic minimum conditi
ternet, for any
of life needed by people? Various methods of calculating the b
ch calculations.
needs of people have been devised by different governments
by international organisations like the World Health Organisat
But in general it is agreed that the basic amount of nourishm
needed to remain healthy, housing, supply of clean drinking wa
education and a minimum wage would constitute an important
of these basic conditions. Providing people with their basic need
considered to be one of the responsibilities of a democratic government.

table ends

Justice Social Justice
Political Theory

Best way of helping the disadvantaged without harming the better-off members of a society, or whether the government should take
in the responsibility of providing a basic minimum to the poor, if
necessary even through a redistribution of resources. In our country
these different approaches are being supported by different political
groups who debate the relative merits of different schemes for helping
marginalised sections of the population such as the rural or urban
poor. We will briefly examine this debate.
A Just society is that society
in which ascending sense of
reverence and descending
sense of contempt is dissolved
into the creation of a
compassionate society
– B.R. Ambedkar


Free Markets versus State Intervention
upporters of free markets maintain that as far as possible,
ndividuals should be free to own property and enter into contracts
nd agreements with others regarding prices and wages and profits.
hey should be free to compete with each other to gain the greatest
mount of benefit. This is a simple description of a free market.

They would maintain that
whatever be the outcome of market distribution it would be just.
However, not all free market supporters today would support
absolutely unregulated markets. Many would now be willing to
accept certain restrictions, for instance, states could step in to ensure
a basic minimum standard of living to all people so that they are
able to compete on equal terms. But they might argue that even here
the most efficient way of providing people with basic services might
be to allow markets in health care, education, and such services, to
develop. In other words, private agencies should be encouraged to
provide such services while state policies should try to empower
people to buy those services. It might also be necessary for the state
to give special help to the old and the sick who cannot compete. But
apart from this, the role of the state should only be to maintain a
framework of laws and regulations to ensure that competition
between individuals remains free of coercion and other obstacles.
They maintain that a free market is the basis of a fair and just society.
The market, it is said, does not care about the caste or religion of the
person; it does not see whether you are a man or a woman. It is
neutral and concerned with the talents and skills that you have. If
you have the merit, then nothing else matters.
One of the arguments put forward in favour of market
distribution is that it gives us more choices. There is no doubt that
the market system gives us more choices as consumers. We can
choose the rice we eat and the school we go to, provided that we have
the means to pay for them. But regarding basic goods and services
what is important is the availability of good quality goods and services
at a cost people can afford. If private agencies do not find this
profitable for them, they may prefer not to enter that particular
market, or to provide cheap and substandard services. That is why
there may be few private schools in remote rural areas and the few
which have been set up may be of low quality. The same would be
true of health care or housing. In such situations the government
might have to step in.
Arguments can be put forward on both sides of the debate but
free markets often exhibit a tendency to work in favour of the already
privileged. This is why many argue that to ensure social justice the
debate should step in to see that basic facilities are made available to
all the members of a society.
In a democratic society disagreements about issues of distribution
nd justice are inevitable and even healthy because they force us to
examine different points of view and rationally defend our own views.
politics is about the negotiation of such disagreements through
debate. In our own country many kinds of social and economic
inequalities exist and much remains to be done if they are to be
reduced. Studying the different principles of justice should help us
to discuss the issues involved and come to an agreement regarding
the best way of pursuing justice.
Justice implies something which it is not only right to do and
wrong not to do; but which some individual person can claim
from us as his moral right.