176
Chapter Eight
LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS
INTRODUCTION
In a democracy, it is not sufficient to have an elected government at the centre
and at the State level. It is also necessary that even at the local level, there
should be an elected government to look after local affairs. In this chapter, you
will study the structure of local government in our country. You will also study
the importance of the local governments and ways to give them independent
powers. After studying this chapter, you will know:
± the importance of local government bodies;
± the provisions made by the 73rd and 74th amendments; and
± functions and responsibilities of the local government bodies.

table starts| seat. From a housewife, Geeta has grown into a leader displaying
political farsightedness - she has harnessed the collective energy of
her Panchayat to renovate water tanks, build a school building,
construct village roads, fight against domestic violence and atrocities
against women, create environmental awareness, and encourage
afforestation and water management in her village. —Panchayati
Raj Update, Vol. XI, No. 3, February 2004.
There is another story of yet another woman achiever. She was
the President (Sarpanch) of a Gram Panchayat of Vengaivasal village
in Tamil Nadu. In 1997, the Tamil Nadu government allotted two
hectares of land to 71 government employees. This piece of land fell
within the vicinity of this Gram Panchayat. On the instructions of
higher authorities the District Collector of Kancheepuram directed
the President of the Gram Panchayat to pass a resolution endorsing
the allotment of the said land for the purpose already decided. The
President and the Gram Panchayat refused to pass such an order
and the Collector issued an order to acquire the land. The Gram
Panchayat filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court against the
Collector’s action. The single judge bench of the High Court upheld
the Collector’s order and ruled that there was no need to take the
Panchayat’s consent. The Panchayat appealed to the Division bench
against the single judge’s order. In its order, the Division Bench
reversed the order of the single judge. The judges held that the
government order amounted to not only infringement of the powers
of the Panchayats but a gross violation of the constitutional status of
the Panchayats. — Panchayati Raj Update, Vol. XII,
June 2005. But aren’t there cases of male mem
of the village panchayat harass
Both these stories are not isolated incidents. They are the woman Sarpanch in so
places? Why are men not hap
representative of a larger transformation that is taking |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | male mem yat harass nch in so n not hap |  |
| when women assum place across India especially after constitutional status responsibility? was accorded to local government institutions in 1993. |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments
WHY LOCAL GOVERNMENTS?

Local government is government at the village and
district level. Local government is about government
closest to the common people. Local government is about
government that involves the day-to-day life and problems
of ordinary citizens. Local government believes that local
knowledge and local interest are essential ingredients for
democratic decision making. They are also necessary for
efficient and people-friendly administration. The
advantage of local government is that it is so near the
people. It is convenient for the people to approach the
local government for solving their problems both quickly
and with minimum cost. In the story of Geeta Rathore, we
noticed that she was able to bring about a significant
change in Jamonia Talab because of her pro-active role
as Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.  Vengaivasal village
is able to still retain its land and the right to decide what
to do with it because of the relentless efforts of its Gram
Panchayat President and members. So, local governments
can be very effective in protecting the local interests of the
people.
Democracy is about meaningful participation. It is also
about accountability. Strong and vibrant local
governments ensure both active participation and
purposeful accountability. Geeta Rathore’s story is one
of committed participation. Vengaivasal village Gram
Panchayat’s relentless efforts to secure its rights over its
own land were an example of a mission to ensure
accountability.  It is at the level of local government that
common citizens can be involved in decision making
concerning their lives, their needs and above all their
development.
It is necessary that in a democracy, tasks, which can
be performed locally, should be left in the hands of the
local people and their representatives. Common people
are more familiar with their local government than with
the government at the State or national level. They are
also more concerned with what local government does or
has failed to do as it has a direct bearing and impact on
Is it possible that we only had
governments at the local level
and a coordinating body at the
national level? I think
Mahatma Gandhi advocated
some ideas along these lines.

Chapter 8: Local Governments
their day-to-day life. Thus, strengthening local
government is like strengthening democratic processes.
Check your progress
±
How does local government strengthen
democracy?
±
In the example given above, what do you think
the Government of Tamil Nadu should have
done?
GROWTH OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN INDIA
Let us now discuss how local government has grown in
India and what our Constitution says about it. It is
believed that self-governing village communities existed
in India from the earliest times in the form of ‘sabhas’
(village assemblies). In the course of time, these village
bodies took the shape of Panchayats (an assembly of five
persons) and these Panchayats resolved issues at the
village level. Their role and functions kept on changing at
different points of time.
In modern times, elected local government bodies were
created after 1882. Lord Rippon, who was the Viceroy of
India at that time, took the initiative in creating these
bodies. They were called the local boards. However, due
to slow progress in this regard, the Indian National
Congress urged the government to take necessary steps
to make all local bodies more effective. Following the
Government of India Act 1919, village panchayats were
established in a number of provinces. This trend continued
after the Government of India Act of 1935.
During India’s freedom movement, Mahatma Gandhi
had strongly pleaded for decentralisation of economic and
political power. He believed that strengthening village
panchayats was a means of effective decentralisation. All
development initiatives must have local involvement in
I don’t know about the past,
but I suspect that a non-elected
village panchayat would
naturally be dominated by the
village elders, the rich and men
from upper strata.

order to be successful.  Panchayats therefore were looked upon as
instruments of decentralisation and participatory democracy.  Our
national movement was concerned about the enormous
concentration of powers in the hands of the Governor General sitting
at Delhi. Therefore, for our leaders, independence meant an assurance
that there will be decentralisation of decision making, executive and
administrative powers.
The independence of India should mean the independence
of the whole of India…Independence must begin at the
bottom. Thus every village will be a republic... It follows
therefore that every village has to be self-sustained and
capable of managing its affairs. In this structure
composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever-
widening, ever-ascending circles. Life will be a pyramid
with the apex sustained by the bottom - Mahatma Gandhi
When the Constitution was prepared, the subject of local
government was assigned to the States. It was also mentioned in the
Directive Principles as one of the policy directives to all governments
in the country. As you have read in Chapter 2, being a part of the
Directive Principles of State Policy, this provision of the Constitution
was non-justiciable and primarily advisory in its nature.
It is felt that the subject of local government including panchayats
did not receive adequate importance in the Constitution. Do you
know why this happened? A few reasons can be advanced here.
Firstly, the turmoil due to the Partition resulted in a strong unitary
inclination in the Constitution. Nehru himself looked upon extreme
localism as a threat to unity and integration of the nation. Secondly,
there was a powerful voice in the Constituent Assembly led by
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar which felt that the faction and caste-ridden nature
of rural society would defeat the noble purpose of local government
at the rural level.
However, nobody denied the importance of people’s participation
in development planning. Many members of the Constituent
Assembly wanted Village Panchayats to be the basis of democracy

table starts| democracy, the villages
maybe trained in the art of
self-government, even
autonomy... We must be able
to reform the villages and
introduce democratic
principles of government
there…”
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, CAD, Vol. VII, p. 428, 17 November 1948
Local Governments in Independent India
Local governments got a fillip after the 73rd and 74th
Constitution Amendment Acts. But even before that, some
efforts in the direction of developing local government bodies
had already taken place. First in the line was the
Community Development Programme in 1952, which
sought to promote people’s participation in local
development in a range of activities. In this background, a
three-tier Panchayati Raj system of local government was
recommended for the rural areas. Some States (like Gujarat,
Maharashtra) adopted the system of elected local bodies
around 1960. But in many States those local bodies did
not have enough powers and functions to look after the
local development. They were very much dependent on the
State and central governments for financial assistance.
Many States did not think it necessary to establish elected
Why are people afraid
local bodies. In many instances, local bodies were dissolved
factionalism at the village le
and the local government was handed over to government
when all the political parties a
officers. Many States had indirect elections to most local |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | e afraid e village le al parties a |  |
| organisations or e bodies. In many States, elections to the local bodies were has factions? Are postponed from time to time. factions always so |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments
in India but they were concerned about factionalism and
many other ills present in the villages.

After 1987, a thorough review of the functioning of local
government institutions was initiated. In 1989 the P.K.Thungon
Committee recommended constitutional recognition for the local
government bodies. A constitutional amendment to provide for
periodic elections to local government institutions, and enlistment of
appropriate functions to them, along with funds, was recommended.
Check your progress
±
Both Nehru and Dr. Ambedkar were not very
enthusiastic about local government bodies.
Did they have similar objections to local
governments?
±
What was the constitutional provision about
local governments before 1992?
±
Which were the States that had established
local government during the 1960s and
1970s ?
73RD AND 74TH AMENDMENTS
In 1989, the central government introduced two constitutional
amendments. These amendments aimed at strengthening local
governments and ensuring an element of uniformity in their structure
and functioning across the country.
The Constitution of Brazil has created States, Federal
Districts and Municipal Councils.  Each of these is
assigned independent powers and jurisdiction. Just as
the Republic cannot interfere in the affairs of the States
(except on grounds provided by the constitution), states
are prohibited from interfering in the affairs of the
municipal councils. This provision protects the powers of
the local government.
Later in 1992, the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments were
passed by the Parliament.  The 73rd Amendment is about rural local
governments (which are also known as Panchayati Raj Institutions

table starts| subject‘. States are free to make their own laws on this | his correctly,
rced local
rms on the
ny: you adopt
through a
! |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| subject. But once the Constitution was amended, the States had to change their laws about local bodies in order to bring these in conformity with the amended Constitution. They were given one year’s time for making necessary changes in their respective State laws in the light of these amendments. If I understand this correct 73rd Amendment the centre forced lo Let us now examine the changes brought about by the government reforms on 73rd amendment in Panchayati Raj institutions. States. This is funny: you ad decentralisation through Three Tier Structure centralised process! All States now have a uniform three tier Panchayati Raj structure. At the base is the ‘Gram Panchayat‘. A Gram Panchayat covers a village or group of villages. The intermediary level is the Mandal (also referred to as Block or Taluka). These bodies are called Mandal or Taluka Panchayats. The intermediary level body need not be constituted in smaller States. At the apex is the Zilla Panchayat covering the entire rural area of the District. The amendment also made a provision for the mandatory creation of the Gram Sabha. The Gram Sabha would comprise all the adult members registered as voters in the Panchayat area. Its role and functions are decided by State legislation. Elections All the three levels of Panchayati Raj Does a Gram sabha mean the institutions are elected directly by the people. democratic forum of the entire The term of each Panchayat body is five years. | his correct rced lo rms on ny: you ad through ! |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments
or PRIs) and the 74th amendment made the provisions relating to
urban local government (Nagarpalikas).  The 73rd and 74th

fresh elections must be held within six months of such
dissolution. This is an important provision that ensures
the existence of elected local bodies. Before the 73rd
amendment, in many States, there used to be indirect
elections to the district bodies and there was no provision
for immediate elections after dissolution.
Reservations
One third of the positions in all panchayat institutions
are reserved for women. Reservations for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes are also provided for at all the three
levels, in proportion to their population. If the States find
it necessary, they can also provide for reservations for the
other backward classes (OBCs).
It is important to note that these reservations apply
not merely to ordinary members in Panchayats but also
to the positions of Chairpersons or ‘Adhyakshas‘ at all
the three levels.  Further, reservation of one-third of the
seats for women is not merely in the general category of
seats but also within the seats reserved for Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward castes. This
means that a seat may be reserved simultaneously for a
woman candidate and one belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes. Thus, a Sarpanch would have
to be a Dalit woman or an Adivasi woman.
Transfer of Subjects
Twenty-nine subjects, which were earlier in the State list
of subjects, are identified and listed in the Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution. These subjects are to be
transferred to the Panchayati Raj institutions. These
subjects were mostly linked to development and welfare
functions at the local level.  The actual transfer of these
functions depends upon the State legislation. Each State
decides how many of these twenty-nine subjects would
be transferred to the local bodies.
We read in the chapter on
Elections that the bill for
reservations for women in the
Assemblies and in the Parliament
could not be passed. How come
women’s reservations in local
bodies were accepted so easily?

table starts| matters listed in the Eleventh Schedul
Some subjects listed in the eleventh schedule
1. Agriculture, …
3. Minor irrigation, water management and
watershed development.
….
8. Small scale industries, including food
processing industries.
…..
10. Rural housing.
11. Drinking water.
.....
13. Roads, culverts,….
14. Rural electrification,….
.....
16. Poverty alleviation programme.
17. Education, including primary and
secondary schools.
18. Technical training and vocational
education.
19. Adult and non-formal education.
20. Libraries.
21. Cultural activities.
22. Markets and fairs.
23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals,
primary health centres and dispensaries.
24. Family welfare.
25. Women and child development.
26. Social welfare, …
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the | e.
Why are subjects only fr
State list to be transferred? W |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | s only fr sferred? W |
| Scheduled Tribes. 28. Public distribution system. ...… | can’t we transfer s from the Union L |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments

The provisions of the 73rd amendment were not made
applicable to the areas inhabited by the Adivasi
populations in many States of India. In 1996, a separate
act was passed extending the provisions of the Panchayat
system to these areas. Many Adivasi communities have
their traditional customs of managing common resources
such as forests and small water reservoirs, etc. Therefore,
the new act protects the rights of these communities to
manage their resources in ways acceptable to them. For
this purpose, more powers are given to the Gram Sabhas
of these areas and elected village panchayats have to get
the consent of the Gram Sabha in many respects. The
idea behind this act is that local traditions of self
government should be protected while introducing
modern elected bodies. This is only consistent with the
spirit of diversity and decentralisation.
State Election Commissioners
The State government is required to appoint a State
Election Commissioner who would be responsible for
conducting elections to the Panchayati Raj institutions.
Earlier, this task was performed by the State
administration which was under the control of the State
government. Now, the office of the State Election
Commissioner is autonomous like the Election
Commissioner of India. However, the State Election
Commissioner is an independent officer and is not linked
to nor is this officer under the control of the Election
Commission of India.
State Finance Commission
The State government is also required to appoint a State
Finance Commission once in five years. This Commission
would examine the financial position of the local
governments in the State. It would also review the
distribution of revenues between the State and local
governments on the one hand and between rural and
urban local governments on the other. This innovation
ensures that allocation of funds to the rural local
governments will not be a political matter.
State governments themselves
are poor. In the last chapter we
read that they ask for money
from  the Central government.
How can they give money to
the local government?

table starts| 74th Amendment
As we mentioned earlier, the 74th amendment dealt with
urban local bodies or Nagarpalikas.
What is an urban area? It is very easy to identify a big
city like Mumbai or Kolkata, but it is not so easy to say
this about some very small urban areas that are
somewhere between a village and a town. The Census of
India defines an urban area as having: (i) a minimum
population of 5,000; (ii) at least 75 per cent of male
working population engaged in non-agricultural
occupations and (iii) a density of population of at least
400 persons per sq. km. As per the 2011 Census, about
31% of India’s population lives in urban areas.
In many ways the 74th amendment is a repetition of Can I hope that these urb
the 73rd amendment, except that it applies to urban areas. local bodies will do someth
All the provisions of the 73rd amendment relating to direct for better housing for the sl
elections, reservations, transfer of subjects, State Election dwellers? Or at least prov
Commission and State Finance Commission are them toilets?
incorporated in the 74th amendment also and thus apply
to Nagarpalikas. The Constitution also mandated the
transfer of a list of functions from the State government to
the urban local bodies. These functions have been listed
in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.
I 73RD 74TH A
MPLEMENTATION OF AND MENDMENTS
All States have now passed a legislation to implement the
provisions of the 73rd and 74th amendments. During the
ten years since these amendments came into force (1994- |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | these urb o someth for the sl east prov | an ing um ide |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments
Activity
±
Identify some of the powers that
your State government has
delegated to panchayats.

table starts|  | R
EAD AN IMAGE | Today there are more
than 600 Zilla Panchayats,
about 6,000 block or
intermediary Panchayats, and
2,40,000 Gram Panchayats in |
| --- | --- | --- |
| rural India and over 100 city Corporations, 1400 town Municipalities and over 2000 Nagar Panchayats in urban India. More than 32 lakh members are elected to these bodies every five years. Of these, at least 13 lakhs are women. In the State Assemblies and Parliament put together we have less than 5000 elected representatives. With local bodies, the number of elected representatives has increased significantly. This flag is a symbol of the expectations of The 73rd and 74th the people about local governments. People amendments have created don’t want only formal laws. They want uniformity in the structures of genuine implementation of those laws. Write Panchayati Raj and briefly what you think about this slogan — Nagarpalika institutions We are the government here in the village! across the country. The presence of these local institutions is by itself a significant achievement and would create an atmosphere and platform for people’s participation in government. The provision for reservation for women at the Panchayats and Nagarpalikas has ensured the presence of a significant number of women in local bodies. As this reservation is also applicable for the positions of Sarpanch and Adhyaksha, a large number of women 188 elected representatives have come to occupy these positions. There |  |  |
|  | This flag is a symbol of the expectations of the people about local governments. People don’t want only formal laws. They want genuine implementation of those laws. Write briefly what you think about this slogan — We are the government here in the village! |  |

table ends


Chapter 8: Local Governments

We also have more than 30 women Mayors in Corporations, over
500 women Adhyakshas of Town Municipalities and nearly 650 Nagar
Panchayats headed by women. Women have gained more power and
confidence by asserting control over resources.  Their presence in
these institutions has given many women a greater understanding
of the working of politics. In many cases, they have brought a new
perspective and a greater sensitivity to discussions at local bodies.
In many cases, women were unable to assert their presence or were
mere proxies for the male members of their family who sponsored
their election. Such instances, however are becoming fewer.
While reservations for Scheduled Castes and Tribes are mandated
by the constitutional amendment, most States have also made a
provision to reserve seats for Backward Castes. As the Indian
population has 16.2 per cent Scheduled Castes and 8.2 per cent
Scheduled Tribes, about 6.6 lakh elected members in the urban
and local bodies hail from these two communities. This has
READ AN IMAGE
Look at this photograph. The local Sarkar is sitting out in the
sun. Is there any other feature that strikes you?

table starts| tensions. The dominant social groups which controlled
the village earlier do not wish to give up their power. This | d but it is
this what
ween theory |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| leads to intensification of struggle for power. But tension and struggle is not always bad. Whenever there is an attempt to make democracy more meaningful and give power to those who did not enjoy it earlier, there is bound to be some conflict and tension in society. The Constitutional amendments assigned as many as 29 subjects to the local governments. All these subjects are related to functions linked to local welfare and So, the law is good but it development needs. The experience with the functioning mostly on paper. Is this wha of local government in the past decade has shown that they call the gap between theor local governments in India enjoy limited autonomy to and practice? perform the functions assigned to them. Many States have not transferred most of the subjects to the local bodies. This means that the local bodies cannot really function in an effective manner. Therefore, the entire exercise of electing so many representatives becomes somewhat symbolic. Some people criticise the formation of the local bodies because this has not changed the way in which decisions are taken at the central and the State level. People at the local level do not enjoy much powers of choosing welfare programmes or allocation of resources. Bolivia is frequently cited as one of the most successful cases of democratic decentralisation in Latin America. In 1994, the Popular Participation Law decentralised power to the local level, allowing for the popular election of mayors, dividing the country into municipalities, and crafting a system of automatic fiscal transfers to the new municipalities. Bolivia is divided into 314 municipal governments. These governments in Bolivia are headed by popularly-elected mayors (presidente municipal) and | d but it this wha ween theor |  |
|  |  |  |

table ends

Chapter 8: Local Governments

Local bodies have very little funds of their own. The dependence of
local bodies on the State and central governments for financial
support has greatly eroded their capacity to operate effectively. While
rural local bodies raise 0.24% of the total revenues collected, they
account for 4% of the total expenditure made by the government. So
they earn much less than they spend. That makes them dependent
on those who give them grants.
Conclusion
This experience suggests that local governments continue to
be agencies implementing the welfare and development schemes
of the central and State government. Giving more power to local
government means that we should be prepared for real
decentralisation of power. Ultimately, democracy means that
power should be shared by the people; people in the villages
and urban localities must have the power to decide what policies
and programmes they want to adopt. As you have studied earlier,
democracy means decentralisation of power and giving more
and more power to the people. The laws about local governments
are an important step in the direction of democratisation. But
the true test of democracy is not merely in the legal provisions
but in the practice of those provisions.
Bolivian local governments have been entrusted with building
local health and education facilities, as well as maintenance of
this infrastructure. In Bolivia, 20% of nationwide tax collections
are distributed among municipalities on a per capita basis.
While these municipalities may levy taxes on motor vehicles,
urban property, and large agricultural properties, fiscal
transfers provide the bulk of the operating budget for these
units.

Chapter 8: Local Governments