78 Chapter Four EXECUTIVE INTRODUCTION Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government. Together, they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading this chapter, you will be able to ± make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive; ± understand the constitutional position of the President of India; ± know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the importance of the Prime Minister; and ± understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.
table starts| activity administration or management. But administration requires a body at the top that will take policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You may have heard about the executives of big companies, banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body of those who function as the chief administrators or the executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide the policies and rules and regulations and then some office holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day
functioning of the organisation. The word executive means a body of persons that looks after the implementation of rules and regulations in actual practice. In the case of government also, one body may take policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations, while the other one would be in charge of implementing those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks after the function of implementation and administration is called the executive. What are the principal functions of the executive?
Executive is the branch of government responsible for the implementation of laws and policies adopted by the legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of policy. The official designations of the executive vary from country to country. Some countries have presidents, while others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also I remember somebody say extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants). that the executive in a democr While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled is accountable to people. Is t with the overall responsibility of government policy, are also true of executives in | | |
| --- | --- | --- | | | ebody say in a democr people. Is t utives in | | | together known as the political executive, those companies? Aren responsible for day to day administration are called the CEOs? | | | table ends Chapter 4: Executive WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE? Every country may not have the same type of executive.
have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England. But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but their roles are different from each other. Why is this so? Activity Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list those who attended the meeting.
why those people and not some others are attending the meeting? To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France, both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi- presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as
well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the chancellor is the head of government.
In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well as head of government. In this system the office of president is very powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America. Chapter 4: Executive Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive
Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party or to different political parties. The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers. Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in- Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the Government.
Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker can report the matter to the Supreme Court. How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka. In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of
Most parliamentary systems have a president or a monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc. table starts| How would you explain to Neha that this is not always the case? P E I ARLIAMENTARY XECUTIVE IN NDIA When the Constitution of India was written, India already had some experience of running the parliamentary system under the Acts of 1919 and 1935.
shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive | | | --- | --- | | can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to | | | ensure that the government would be sensitive to public expectations and would be responsible and accountable. The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was the presidential form of government. But the presidential executive puts much emphasis on the president as the chief executive and as source of all executive power. There is always the danger of personality cult in presidential executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted a government that would have a strong executive branch, but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the Haven’t we had executive will be answerable to and controlled by the Prime Ministers? legislature or people’s representatives. So the Constitution that even the pa adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the system is not fool p | very stro Does it me rliament roof agai | table ends Chapter 4: Executive Check your progress Check your progress
Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Neha: It is really very simple. A country having a president has a presidential executive and one with a prime minister has parliamentary executive. and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers. The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single transferable vote.
The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground for impeachment is violation of the Constitution. Power and position of President Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.
Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice….., and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration. Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the scope of the President’s powers, a specific mention was made in the Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of Ministers will be binding on the President.
made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered advice of the Council of Ministers. table starts| Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the President has to follow the advice of the Council of Ministers. “We did not give him any real
power but we have made his position one of authority and dignity. The constitution wants to create neither a real executive nor a mere figurehead, but a head that neither reigns nor governs; it wants to create a great figurehead...” Jawaharlal Nehru
734 Discretionary Powers of the President On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the President has no discretionary power under any circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment. Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed Am I just a figurehead or a of all important matters and deliberations of the Council asking real questions? The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
textbook writers give me po | | | | --- | --- | --- | | | ead or a ns? Did e me po | | | the information that the President may call for. The to ask questions I President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses or am I asking que his views on matters confronting the country. have in their mind? | | | table ends Chapter 4: Executive table starts| It is very we
President as has a woman President? | | Besides this, there are at least three situations where the President can exercise the powers using his or her own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted that the President can send back the advice given by the Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider | | --- | --- | --- | | | It is very we President as has a woman President? | | | | | |
table ends Chapter 4: Executive bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President has to give assent to that bill. However, there is no mention in the Constitution about the time limit within which the President must send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President
can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective manner. This is sometimes referred to as ‘pocket veto’. Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister. Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances,
two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support of the majority or who can actually form and run the government. Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained President’s role in choosing the Prime Minister After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive
and there have been many instances when no party had clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do in such situations? No political party or coalition secured majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee, “to furnish documents in support of his claim from concerned political parties.” Not stopping at this the President also advised Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of
a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and coalitions occupy power. For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a
ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place. Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term, who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility
of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the government of the country. The Vice President of India The Vice President is elected for five years. His election method is similar to that of the President, the only difference is that members of State legislatures are not part of the electoral college. The Vice President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex-
officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over the office of the President when there is a vacancy by reasons of death, resignation, removal by impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts as the President only until a new President is elected. Jatti acted as President on the death of Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was elected. table starts| different position. He is saying that the provision
regarding President’s rule should be used only sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses are open to the President? Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on the order promulgating President’s rule. Dismiss the Prime Minister. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State. Make a press statement about how the Prime Minister is wrong. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and
try to dissuade him from taking this action, but if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order. | | | | --- | --- | --- | | P M C M RIME INISTER AND OUNCIL OF INISTERS ust. R C EAD A ARTOON | | | | | R C EAD A ARTOON | | | Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Tr | | | | | | | | | There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister ‘leads’ the Council of Ministers | | table ends
Chapter 4: Executive table starts| India. R of Times The in Laxman
K R Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | | | We have already seen earlier in this EAD A C ARTOON chapter that the President exercises his | | --- | --- | --- | --- | | | | R | C EAD A ARTOON |
| | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | | | | | | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | o people want to be rs? This cartoon seems to that it is only for perks tus Then why is there tion for some portfolios? | | | | | | table ends Chapter 4: Executive without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the Parliament within six months.
There were some members in the Constituent Assembly who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister: “Swiss system under which the legislature elects the executive for a certain period …is to my mind the best form of government for the provinces… The system of the single transferable vote is ...the best system that can be adopted for the appointment of the executive because in that all interests will be represented and no party in the legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not
represented.” Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD, Vol. 631, Size of the Council of Ministers Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions as there was no restriction on the number of the members of
the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States). In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the executive. But remember that the most important feature of parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the control and supervision of the legislature. The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence table starts| | vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue or agree to a policy for which there is collective responsibility. In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place
The Council of Ministers cannot exist without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’. It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime Is it that a person becomes Prime Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the Minister because he/she is powerful or is it that you government and decides on the policies of the government. become powerful once you have Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from
become the Prime Minister? various sources: control over the Council of Ministers, leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of 92 personalities during elections, projection as national | | --- | --- | | | Is it that a person Minister beca powerful or i become powerfu become the Prim | | | | table ends
table starts| in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not | | India. N of Times The in Laxman K R
happy the n you | | | --- | --- | --- | --- | | | | N | | | been the case when governments have been R C EAD A ARTOON led by coalitions of political parties. Since 1989, we have witnessed many coalition governments in India. Many of these governments could not remain in power for the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were either removed or they resigned due to loss of support of the majority. These developments have affected the working of the parliamentary executive. In the first place, these developments have resulted in a growing discretionary role of the President in the selection of Prime Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature of Indian politics in this period has necessitated much more consultation between political partners, leading to erosion of prime ministerial authority. Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on This Chief Minster is not happy various prerogatives of the Prime Minister even after winning the like choosing the ministers and deciding confidence motion Can you their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even imagine why this is so? the policies and programmes of the government cannot be decided by the Prime Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a negotiator than as leader of the government. At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though | R C EAD A ARTOO | N | | | | This Chief Minster is not even after winning confidence motion Ca imagine why this is so? | happy the n you | | | | | | | | | | | |
table ends Chapter 4: Executive the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too. Check your progress Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
What will he/she do? Select those who are experts in the various subjects. Select only those who are from his/her party. Select those who are personally loyal and dependable. Select those who are supporters of the government.
Take into account the political weight of the various aspirants and choose from among them. PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY Who implements the decisions of the ministers? The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the difference between this machinery and the military service, it is described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as
permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these policies. In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are in charge of government and the administration is under their control and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the administration. India has established professional administrative
table starts| in elections and the new government wants to opt for new policies in the place of policies of the previous government. In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently participate in drafting the policy and in its implementation. The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State services, employees of the local governments, and
technical and managerial staff running public sector undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of the importance of the non-partisan and professional bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of India. Similar public service commissions are provided for the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions
are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the Supreme Court. While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment, the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the Constitution has provided reservation in jobs for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Subsequently, reservations Yes, I know that the offic have also been provided for women, Other Backward are there to serve the peop
Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS). But people are always afraid | | | | --- | --- | --- | | | he offic he peop s afraid | | | These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be these officers. And o behave as if they more representative and social inequalities will not come masters in the way of recruitment to the civil service. | | | table ends Chapter 4: Executive Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service
and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district is the most important officer of the government at the district level. Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the central government, they can go back into the service of the central government and most importantly, only the central government can
take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism, this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central government over the administration of the States. The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so
powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer. It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen. Only if the democratically elected government controls the bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment, many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil
Chapter 4: Executive servants from political interference in the performance of their duties. It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable. Conclusion The modern executive is a very powerful institution of government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to other organs of the government. This generates a greater need
to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections, constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become unresponsive.
78
Chapter Four
EXECUTIVE
INTRODUCTION
Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government. Together,
they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look
after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in
coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a
parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the
legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the
executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the
changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading
this chapter, you will be able to
± make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;
± understand the constitutional position of the President of India;
± know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the
importance of the Prime Minister; and
± understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.
table starts| activity administration or management. But
administration requires a body at the top that will take
policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and
coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You
may have heard about the executives of big companies,
banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body
of those who function as the chief administrators or the
executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide
the policies and rules and regulations and then some office
holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day
functioning of the organisation. The word executive means
a body of persons that looks after the implementation of
rules and regulations in actual practice. In the case of government also, one body may take
policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations,
while the other one would be in charge of implementing
those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks
after the function of implementation and administration
is called the executive. What are the principal functions of the executive?
Executive is the branch of government responsible for the
implementation of laws and policies adopted by the
legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of
policy. The official designations of the executive vary from
country to country. Some countries have presidents, while
others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just
about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also I remember somebody say
extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants). that the executive in a democr
While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled is accountable to people. Is t
with the overall responsibility of government policy, are also true of executives in | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | ebody say in a democr people. Is t utives in | |
| together known as the political executive, those companies? Aren responsible for day to day administration are called the CEOs? | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE? Every country may not have the same type of executive.
have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England. But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very
different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the
powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the
King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but
their roles are different from each other. Why is this so? Activity
Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit
meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list
those who attended the meeting.
why those people and not some others are attending
the meeting? To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of
executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a
presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the
president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a
constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief
of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France,
both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi-
presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as
well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible
to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the
Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head
of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president
as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of
government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president
is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the
president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary
system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the
chancellor is the head of government.
In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well
as head of government. In this system the office of president is very
powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system
include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America. Chapter 4: Executive

Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka
In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of
Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive
Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both
the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party
or to different political parties. The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President
chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the
Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the
President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers. Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the
Government.
Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed
except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds
of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less
than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the
Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker
can report the matter to the Supreme Court. How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka
different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the
impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka. In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of
Most parliamentary systems have a president or a
monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the
role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime
minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with
such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well
as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a
prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president
may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is
possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may
belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with
such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc. table starts| How would you explain to Neha that this is not
always the case? P E I
ARLIAMENTARY XECUTIVE IN NDIA
When the Constitution of India was written, India already
had some experience of running the parliamentary system
under the Acts of 1919 and 1935.
shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive | |
| --- | --- |
| can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to | |
| ensure that the government would be sensitive to public expectations and would be responsible and accountable. The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was the presidential form of government. But the presidential executive puts much emphasis on the president as the chief executive and as source of all executive power. There is always the danger of personality cult in presidential executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted a government that would have a strong executive branch, but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the Haven’t we had executive will be answerable to and controlled by the Prime Ministers? legislature or people’s representatives. So the Constitution that even the pa adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the system is not fool p | very stro Does it me rliament roof agai |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Neha: It is really very simple. A country having
a president has a presidential executive and
one with a prime minister has parliamentary
executive. and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the
national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers. The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union
formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers
through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The
President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct
election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected
indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary
citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in
accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single
transferable vote.
The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by
following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a
special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground
for impeachment is violation of the Constitution. Power and position of President
Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of
Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head
to aid and advise the President who shall
in the exercise of his functions, act in
accordance with such advice.
Provided that the President may require
the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice….., and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration. Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the
advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the
scope of the President’s powers, a specific mention was made in the
Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of
Ministers will be binding on the President.
made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of
Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered
advice of the Council of Ministers. table starts| Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council
of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha
and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the
President has to follow the advice of the Council of
Ministers. “We did not give him any real
power but we have made his
position one of authority and
dignity. The constitution wants
to create neither a real
executive nor a mere
figurehead, but a head that
neither reigns nor governs; it
wants to create a great
figurehead...”
Jawaharlal Nehru
734
Discretionary Powers of the President
On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the
President has no discretionary power under any
circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment. Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed
Am I just a figurehead or a
of all important matters and deliberations of the Council
asking real questions? The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
textbook writers give me po | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | ead or a ns? Did e me po | |
| the information that the President may call for. The to ask questions I President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses or am I asking que his views on matters confronting the country. have in their mind? | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

table starts| It is very we
President as
has a woman
President? | | Besides this, there are at least three situations where
the President can exercise the powers using his or her
own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted
that the President can send back the advice given by the
Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | It is very we President as has a woman President? | |
| | | |
table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the
same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President
has to give assent to that bill. However, there is no mention in the
Constitution about the time limit within which the President must
send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President
can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This
gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective
manner. This is sometimes referred to as ‘pocket veto’. Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political
circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister. Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support
of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime
Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine
a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in
the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances,
two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the
majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to
appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has
to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support
of the majority or who can actually form and run the government. Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased
the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary
elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained
President’s role in choosing the Prime Minister
After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive
and there have been many instances when no party had
clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do
in such situations? No political party or coalition secured
majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and
its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President
Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the
leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee, “to furnish
documents in support of his claim from concerned political
parties.” Not stopping at this the President also advised
Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of
a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential
intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a
request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could
not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential
discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for
presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and
coalitions occupy power. For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a
ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we
need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers
is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This
also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any
time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place. Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term,
who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may
symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of
the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party
has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility
of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the
government of the country. The Vice President of India
The Vice President is elected for five years. His election
method is similar to that of the President, the only
difference is that members of State legislatures are
not part of the electoral college. The Vice President
may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by
the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex-
officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over
the office of the President when there is a vacancy by
reasons of death, resignation, removal by
impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts
as the President only until a new President is elected. Jatti acted as President on the death of
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was
elected. table starts| different position. He is saying that the provision
regarding President’s rule should be used only
sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses
are open to the President? Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on
the order promulgating President’s rule. Dismiss the Prime Minister. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State. Make a press statement about how the Prime
Minister is wrong. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and
try to dissuade him from taking this action, but
if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order. | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| P M C M RIME INISTER AND OUNCIL OF INISTERS ust. R C EAD A ARTOON | | |
| | R C EAD A ARTOON | |
| Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Tr | | |
| | | |
| | There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister ‘leads’ the Council of Ministers! | |

table ends
Chapter 4: Executive

table starts| India. R
of
Times
The
in
Laxman
K
R
Why d
ministe
suggest
and sta
competi | | | We have already seen earlier in this
EAD A C ARTOON chapter that the President exercises his |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | R | C EAD A ARTOON |
| | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | | |
| | | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | o people want to be rs? This cartoon seems to that it is only for perks tus! Then why is there tion for some portfolios? |
| | | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the
Parliament within six months.
There were some members in the Constituent Assembly
who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature
and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister:
“Swiss system under which the legislature elects the
executive for a certain period …is to my mind the best
form of government for the provinces… The system of the
single transferable vote is ...the best system that can be
adopted for the appointment of the executive because in
that all interests will be represented and no party in the
legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not
represented.”
Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD, Vol. 631,
Size of the Council of Ministers
Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council
of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and
requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of
the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear
majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the
members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions
as there was no restriction on the number of the members of
the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States
also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members
of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States). In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the
various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the
executive. But remember that the most important feature of
parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the
control and supervision of the legislature. The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence

table starts| | vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads
to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also
indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or
decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the
decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue
or agree to a policy for which there is collective
responsibility. In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place
The Council of Ministers cannot exist
without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into
existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath
of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister
automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council
of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a
minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime
Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers
on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament
on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’. It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister
to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime
Is it that a person becomes Prime
Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the
Minister because he/she is
powerful or is it that you government and decides on the policies of the government. become powerful once you have Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from
become the Prime Minister? various sources: control over the Council of Ministers,
leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the
bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of
92 personalities during elections, projection as national |
| --- | --- |
| | Is it that a person Minister beca powerful or i become powerfu become the Prim |
| | |

table ends
table starts| in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not | | India. N
of
Times
The
in
Laxman
K
R
happy
the
n you | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | N | |
| been the case when governments have been R C EAD A ARTOON led by coalitions of political parties. Since 1989, we have witnessed many coalition governments in India. Many of these governments could not remain in power for the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were either removed or they resigned due to loss of support of the majority. These developments have affected the working of the parliamentary executive. In the first place, these developments have resulted in a growing discretionary role of the President in the selection of Prime Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature of Indian politics in this period has necessitated much more consultation between political partners, leading to erosion of prime ministerial authority. Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on This Chief Minster is not happy various prerogatives of the Prime Minister even after winning the like choosing the ministers and deciding confidence motion! Can you their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even imagine why this is so? the policies and programmes of the government cannot be decided by the Prime Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a negotiator than as leader of the government. At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though | R C EAD A ARTOO | N | |
| | This Chief Minster is not even after winning confidence motion! Ca imagine why this is so? | happy the n you | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime
Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the
Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main
principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too. Check your progress
Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
What will he/she do? Select those who are experts in the various
subjects. Select only those who are from his/her party. Select those who are personally loyal and
dependable. Select those who are supporters of the
government.
Take into account the political weight of the
various aspirants and choose from among them. PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY
Who implements the decisions of the ministers? The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime
Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the
bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the
difference between this machinery and the military service, it is
described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as
permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of
assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these
policies. In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are
in charge of government and the administration is under their control
and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also
exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers
cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is
the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the
administration. India has established professional administrative
table starts| in elections and the new government wants to opt for new
policies in the place of policies of the previous government. In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the
administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently
participate in drafting the policy and in its
implementation. The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously
complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State
services, employees of the local governments, and
technical and managerial staff running public sector
undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of
the importance of the non-partisan and professional
bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil
services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the
basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission
has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process
of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of
India. Similar public service commissions are provided for
the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions
are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension
is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the
Supreme Court. While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment,
the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society
including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be
part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the
Constitution has provided reservation in jobs for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Subsequently, reservations Yes, I know that the offic
have also been provided for women, Other Backward are there to serve the peop
Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS). But people are always afraid | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | he offic he peop s afraid | |
| These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be these officers. And o behave as if they more representative and social inequalities will not come masters! in the way of recruitment to the civil service. | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service
and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level
bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district
is the most important officer of the government at the district level. Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that
the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the
central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular
State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State
government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the
central government, they can go back into the service of the central
government and most importantly, only the central government can
take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key
administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and
control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS
officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is
looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service
Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism,
this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central
government over the administration of the States. The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies
of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so
powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer. It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is
insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen. Only if the democratically elected government controls the
bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On
the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy
into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the
Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment,
many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil
Chapter 4: Executive
servants from political interference in the performance of their duties. It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the
accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an
expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make
the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable. Conclusion
The modern executive is a very powerful institution of
government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to
other organs of the government. This generates a greater need
to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of
our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must
be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a
parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections,
constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic
politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become
unresponsive.
78
Chapter Four
EXECUTIVE
INTRODUCTION
Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government. Together,
they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look
after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in
coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a
parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the
legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the
executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the
changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading
this chapter, you will be able to
± make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;
± understand the constitutional position of the President of India;
± know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the
importance of the Prime Minister; and
± understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.
table starts| activity administration or management. But
administration requires a body at the top that will take
policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and
coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You
may have heard about the executives of big companies,
banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body
of those who function as the chief administrators or the
executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide
the policies and rules and regulations and then some office
holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day
functioning of the organisation. The word executive means
a body of persons that looks after the implementation of
rules and regulations in actual practice. In the case of government also, one body may take
policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations,
while the other one would be in charge of implementing
those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks
after the function of implementation and administration
is called the executive. What are the principal functions of the executive?
Executive is the branch of government responsible for the
implementation of laws and policies adopted by the
legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of
policy. The official designations of the executive vary from
country to country. Some countries have presidents, while
others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just
about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also I remember somebody say
extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants). that the executive in a democr
While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled is accountable to people. Is t
with the overall responsibility of government policy, are also true of executives in | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | ebody say in a democr people. Is t utives in | |
| together known as the political executive, those companies? Aren responsible for day to day administration are called the CEOs? | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE? Every country may not have the same type of executive.
have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England. But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very
different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the
powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the
King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but
their roles are different from each other. Why is this so? Activity
Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit
meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list
those who attended the meeting.
why those people and not some others are attending
the meeting? To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of
executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a
presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the
president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a
constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief
of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France,
both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi-
presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as
well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible
to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the
Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head
of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president
as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of
government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president
is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the
president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary
system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the
chancellor is the head of government.
In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well
as head of government. In this system the office of president is very
powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system
include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America. Chapter 4: Executive

Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka
In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of
Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive
Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both
the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party
or to different political parties. The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President
chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the
Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the
President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers. Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the
Government.
Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed
except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds
of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less
than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the
Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker
can report the matter to the Supreme Court. How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka
different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the
impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka. In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of
Most parliamentary systems have a president or a
monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the
role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime
minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with
such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well
as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a
prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president
may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is
possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may
belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with
such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc. table starts| How would you explain to Neha that this is not
always the case? P E I
ARLIAMENTARY XECUTIVE IN NDIA
When the Constitution of India was written, India already
had some experience of running the parliamentary system
under the Acts of 1919 and 1935.
shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive | |
| --- | --- |
| can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to | |
| ensure that the government would be sensitive to public expectations and would be responsible and accountable. The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was the presidential form of government. But the presidential executive puts much emphasis on the president as the chief executive and as source of all executive power. There is always the danger of personality cult in presidential executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted a government that would have a strong executive branch, but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the Haven’t we had executive will be answerable to and controlled by the Prime Ministers? legislature or people’s representatives. So the Constitution that even the pa adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the system is not fool p | very stro Does it me rliament roof agai |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Check your progress
Neha: It is really very simple. A country having
a president has a presidential executive and
one with a prime minister has parliamentary
executive. and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the
national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers. The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union
formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers
through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The
President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct
election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected
indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary
citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in
accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single
transferable vote.
The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by
following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a
special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground
for impeachment is violation of the Constitution. Power and position of President
Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of
Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head
to aid and advise the President who shall
in the exercise of his functions, act in
accordance with such advice.
Provided that the President may require
the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice….., and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration. Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the
advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the
scope of the President’s powers, a specific mention was made in the
Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of
Ministers will be binding on the President.
made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of
Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered
advice of the Council of Ministers. table starts| Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council
of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha
and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the
President has to follow the advice of the Council of
Ministers. “We did not give him any real
power but we have made his
position one of authority and
dignity. The constitution wants
to create neither a real
executive nor a mere
figurehead, but a head that
neither reigns nor governs; it
wants to create a great
figurehead...”
Jawaharlal Nehru
734
Discretionary Powers of the President
On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the
President has no discretionary power under any
circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment. Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed
Am I just a figurehead or a
of all important matters and deliberations of the Council
asking real questions? The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
textbook writers give me po | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | ead or a ns? Did e me po | |
| the information that the President may call for. The to ask questions I President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses or am I asking que his views on matters confronting the country. have in their mind? | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

table starts| It is very we
President as
has a woman
President? | | Besides this, there are at least three situations where
the President can exercise the powers using his or her
own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted
that the President can send back the advice given by the
Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | It is very we President as has a woman President? | |
| | | |
table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the
same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President
has to give assent to that bill. However, there is no mention in the
Constitution about the time limit within which the President must
send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President
can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This
gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective
manner. This is sometimes referred to as ‘pocket veto’. Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political
circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister. Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support
of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime
Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine
a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in
the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances,
two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the
majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to
appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has
to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support
of the majority or who can actually form and run the government. Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased
the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary
elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained
President’s role in choosing the Prime Minister
After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive
and there have been many instances when no party had
clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do
in such situations? No political party or coalition secured
majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and
its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President
Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the
leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee, “to furnish
documents in support of his claim from concerned political
parties.” Not stopping at this the President also advised
Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of
a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential
intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a
request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could
not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential
discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for
presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and
coalitions occupy power. For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a
ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we
need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers
is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This
also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any
time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place. Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term,
who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may
symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of
the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party
has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility
of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the
government of the country. The Vice President of India
The Vice President is elected for five years. His election
method is similar to that of the President, the only
difference is that members of State legislatures are
not part of the electoral college. The Vice President
may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by
the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex-
officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over
the office of the President when there is a vacancy by
reasons of death, resignation, removal by
impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts
as the President only until a new President is elected. Jatti acted as President on the death of
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was
elected. table starts| different position. He is saying that the provision
regarding President’s rule should be used only
sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses
are open to the President? Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on
the order promulgating President’s rule. Dismiss the Prime Minister. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State. Make a press statement about how the Prime
Minister is wrong. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and
try to dissuade him from taking this action, but
if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order. | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| P M C M RIME INISTER AND OUNCIL OF INISTERS ust. R C EAD A ARTOON | | |
| | R C EAD A ARTOON | |
| Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Tr | | |
| | | |
| | There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister ‘leads’ the Council of Ministers! | |

table ends
Chapter 4: Executive

table starts| India. R
of
Times
The
in
Laxman
K
R
Why d
ministe
suggest
and sta
competi | | | We have already seen earlier in this
EAD A C ARTOON chapter that the President exercises his |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | R | C EAD A ARTOON |
| | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | | |
| | | Why d ministe suggest and sta competi | o people want to be rs? This cartoon seems to that it is only for perks tus! Then why is there tion for some portfolios? |
| | | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive
without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the
Parliament within six months.
There were some members in the Constituent Assembly
who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature
and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister:
“Swiss system under which the legislature elects the
executive for a certain period …is to my mind the best
form of government for the provinces… The system of the
single transferable vote is ...the best system that can be
adopted for the appointment of the executive because in
that all interests will be represented and no party in the
legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not
represented.”
Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD, Vol. 631,
Size of the Council of Ministers
Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council
of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and
requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of
the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear
majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the
members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions
as there was no restriction on the number of the members of
the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States
also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members
of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States). In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the
various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the
executive. But remember that the most important feature of
parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the
control and supervision of the legislature. The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence

table starts| | vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads
to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also
indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or
decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the
decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue
or agree to a policy for which there is collective
responsibility. In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place
The Council of Ministers cannot exist
without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into
existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath
of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister
automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council
of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a
minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime
Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers
on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament
on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’. It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister
to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime
Is it that a person becomes Prime
Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the
Minister because he/she is
powerful or is it that you government and decides on the policies of the government. become powerful once you have Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from
become the Prime Minister? various sources: control over the Council of Ministers,
leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the
bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of
92 personalities during elections, projection as national |
| --- | --- |
| | Is it that a person Minister beca powerful or i become powerfu become the Prim |
| | |

table ends
table starts| in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not | | India. N
of
Times
The
in
Laxman
K
R
happy
the
n you | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | N | |
| been the case when governments have been R C EAD A ARTOON led by coalitions of political parties. Since 1989, we have witnessed many coalition governments in India. Many of these governments could not remain in power for the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were either removed or they resigned due to loss of support of the majority. These developments have affected the working of the parliamentary executive. In the first place, these developments have resulted in a growing discretionary role of the President in the selection of Prime Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature of Indian politics in this period has necessitated much more consultation between political partners, leading to erosion of prime ministerial authority. Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on This Chief Minster is not happy various prerogatives of the Prime Minister even after winning the like choosing the ministers and deciding confidence motion! Can you their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even imagine why this is so? the policies and programmes of the government cannot be decided by the Prime Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a negotiator than as leader of the government. At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though | R C EAD A ARTOO | N | |
| | This Chief Minster is not even after winning confidence motion! Ca imagine why this is so? | happy the n you | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime
Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the
Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main
principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too. Check your progress
Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
What will he/she do? Select those who are experts in the various
subjects. Select only those who are from his/her party. Select those who are personally loyal and
dependable. Select those who are supporters of the
government.
Take into account the political weight of the
various aspirants and choose from among them. PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY
Who implements the decisions of the ministers? The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime
Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the
bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the
difference between this machinery and the military service, it is
described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as
permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of
assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these
policies. In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are
in charge of government and the administration is under their control
and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also
exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers
cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is
the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the
administration. India has established professional administrative
table starts| in elections and the new government wants to opt for new
policies in the place of policies of the previous government. In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the
administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently
participate in drafting the policy and in its
implementation. The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously
complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State
services, employees of the local governments, and
technical and managerial staff running public sector
undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of
the importance of the non-partisan and professional
bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil
services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the
basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission
has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process
of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of
India. Similar public service commissions are provided for
the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions
are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension
is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the
Supreme Court. While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment,
the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society
including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be
part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the
Constitution has provided reservation in jobs for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Subsequently, reservations Yes, I know that the offic
have also been provided for women, Other Backward are there to serve the peop
Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS). But people are always afraid | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | he offic he peop s afraid | |
| These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be these officers. And o behave as if they more representative and social inequalities will not come masters! in the way of recruitment to the civil service. | | |

table ends

Chapter 4: Executive

Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service
and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level
bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district
is the most important officer of the government at the district level. Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that
the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the
central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular
State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State
government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the
central government, they can go back into the service of the central
government and most importantly, only the central government can
take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key
administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and
control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS
officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is
looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service
Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism,
this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central
government over the administration of the States. The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies
of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so
powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer. It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is
insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen. Only if the democratically elected government controls the
bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On
the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy
into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the
Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment,
many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil
Chapter 4: Executive
servants from political interference in the performance of their duties. It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the
accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an
expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make
the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable. Conclusion
The modern executive is a very powerful institution of
government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to
other organs of the government. This generates a greater need
to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of
our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must
be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a
parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections,
constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic
politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become
unresponsive.
