Equality This chapter is about the concept of equality, a value that is also enshrined in our Constitution. In reflecting on this concept it examines the following questions: What is equality? Why should we be concerned about this moral and political ideal? Does the pursuit of equality involve treating everyone the same way in every condition?
How may we pursue equality and minimise inequality in different spheres of life? How do we distinguish between different dimensions of equality — political, economic and social? In the course of understanding and answering these questions, you would encounter some important ideologies of our time — socialism, marxism, liberalism and feminism. As a political individual, the concept of equality invokes the idea that human beings have an equal worth regard
of their colour, gender, race, or nationality maintains that human beings deserve equality consideration and respect because of the common humanity. It is this notion of a shame humanity that lies behind, for instance, notions of universal human rights or ‘crisis against humanity’. In the modern period the equality of human beings has been used as a rally slogan in the struggles against states and so
do institutions which uphold inequalities of raw wealth status or privilege, among people in the eighteenth century, the Free revolutionaries used the slogan ‘Libe Search for quotations Equality and Fraternity’ to revolt against from different religious scriptures that affirm landed feudal aristocracy.
WHY DOES EQUALITY MATTER? country we can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing, schools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms along with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or toilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences between what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and the table on inequalities within our country. FACT SHEET ON GLOBAL INEQUALITIES 1. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater
than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy,
thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed countries.
We can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing, chools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms long with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or oilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences etween what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and he table on inequalities within our country. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed countries. Source: Human Development Report, 2005, UNDP. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed women or dalits who feel marginalised in our society.
is a widely accepted ideal which is embodied in the constitutions and laws of many countries. ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES IN INDIA Here are some findings from the Census of India held in 2011 about household amenities and assets. You don’t need to memorise any of these figures. Just read these to understand the extent of urban-rural disparities in the country. Where would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in the house 35% 71% Bathroom in the house 45% 87% Television 33% 77% Scooter/Moped/ Motorcycle 14% 35% Car/Jeep/ Van 2% 10% Thus we face a paradox : almost everyone acc the ideal of equality, yet almost everywhere encounter inequality. We live in a complex worl unequal wealth, opportunities, work situations, power. Should we be concerned about these kind inequalities? Are they a permanent and inevit feature of social life which reflects the difference Why talk about talent and ability of Why talk about global or national inequalities when all around us there are inequalities to which nobody seems to
Just look at the way my parents favour my brother over me. the concept of equality which we will consider here are : to promote equality should we always treat all persons in exactly the same way? How should a society decide which differences of treatment or reward are acceptable and which are not? Also, what kind of policies should we pursue to try and make the society more egalitarian?
3.2 WHAT IS EQUALITY? Take a look at these images. All of them make distinctions between human beings on grounds of race and colour and these appear to most of us as unacceptable. In fact, such distinctions violate our intuitive understanding of equality which tells us that all human beings should be entitled to the same respect and consideration because of their common humanity. However, treating people with equal respect need not mean always treating them in an identical way. No society treats all its members
in exactly the same way under all conditions. The smooth functioning of society requires division of work and functions and people often enjoy different status and rewards on account of it. At times these differences of treatment may appear acceptable or even necessary. For instance, we usually do not feel that giving prime ministers, or army generals, a special official rank and status goes against the notion of equality, provided their privileges are not misused. But some other kinds of inequalities may seem unjust. For instance, if a child born in a slum is denied nutritious food or good education through no fault of his/her own, it may appear unfair to us.
The question that arises is which distinctions and differences are acceptable and which are not? When people are treated differently just because they are born in a particular religion or race or caste or gender, we regard it as an unacceptable form of inequality. But human beings may pursue different ambitions and goals and not all may be equally successful. So long as they are able to develop the best in themselves we would not feel that equality has been undermined. Some may become good musicians while others may not be equally outstanding, some become famous scientists while others more noted for their hard work and conscientiousness.
commitment to the ideal of equality does not imply the elimination of all forms of differences. It merely suggests that the treatment we receive and the opportunities we enjoy must not be pre-determined by birth or social circumstance. Equality of Opportunities The concept of equality implies that all people, as human beings, are entitled to the same rights and opportunities to develop their skills and talents, and to pursue their goals and ambitions.
means that in a society people may differ with regard to their choices and preferences. They may also have different talents and skills which results in some being more successful in their chosen careers than others. But just because only some become ace cricketers or successful lawyers, it does not follow that the society should be considered unequal. In other words, it is not the lack of equality of status or wealth or privilege that is significant but the inequalities in people’s access to such basic goods, as education, health care, safe housing, that make for an unequal and unjust society. Natural and Social Inequalities
A distinction has sometimes been made in political theory between natural inequalities and socially-produced inequalities. Natural inequalities are those that emerge between people as a result of their different capabilities and talents. Natural inequalities are considered to be the result of the different characteristics and abilities with which people are born. It is generally ssumed that natural differences cannot be altered. Social inequalities n the other hand are those created by society. Certain societies ay, for instance, value those who perform intellectual work over hose who do manual work and reward them differently. They may eat differently people of different race, or colour, or gender, or caste. ifferences of this kind reflect the values of a society and some of hese may certainly appear to us to be unjust. This distinction is sometimes useful in helping us to distinguish etween acceptable and unfair inequalities in society but it is not lways clear or self-evident. For instance, when certain inequalities n the treatment of people have existed over a long period of time hey may appear to us as justifiable because they are based on atural inequalities, that is, characteristics that people are born ith and cannot easily change. For example, women were for long escribed as ‘the weaker sex’, considered timid and of lesser ntelligence than men, needing special protection. Therefore, it was lt that denying women equal rights could be justified. Black people n Africa were considered by their colonial masters to be of lesser | | | | are different from socially-produced inequalities which emerge as a consequence of inequalities of opportunity or the exploitation of some groups in a society by others. Another problem which arises with the idea of natural differences is
that some differences which could be considered natural need no longer be seen as unalterable. For instance, advances in medical science and technologies have helped many disabled people to function effectively in society. Today, computers can help blind people, wheel chairs and artificial limbs can help in cases of physical disability, even a person’s looks can be changed with cosmetic surgery. The famous physicist Stephen Hawking can hardly move or speak but he has made major contributions to science. It would seem unjust to most people today if disabled people are denied necessary help to overcome the effects of their disability or a fair reward for their work on the grounds that they
are naturally less capable. Given all these complexities, it would be difficult to use the natural/ socially-produced distinction as a standard by which the laws and policies of a society can be assessed. For this reason many theorists today differentiate between inequality arising from our choices and inequalities operating on account of the family or circumstance in which a person is born. It is the latter that is a source of concern to advocates of equality and which they wish to minimise and eliminate. 3.3 THREE DIMENSIONS OF EQUALITY After considering what kind of social differences are unacceptable
we need to ask what are the different dimensions of equality that we may pursue or seek to achieve in society. While identifying different kinds of inequalities that exist in society, various thinkers and ideologies have highlighted three main dimensions of equality namely, political, social and economic. It is only by addressing each of these three different dimensions of equality can we move towards a more just and equal society. Political Equality In democratic societies political equality would normally include granting equal citizenship to all the members of the state.
distinctions made by society as a result of the differences of power between people and nations rather than based on their inborn characteristics. Equal citizenship brings with it certain basic rights such as the right to vote, freedom of expression, movement and association and freedom of belief. These are rights which are considered necessary to enable citizens to develop themselves and participate in the affairs of the state. But they are legal rights, guaranteed by the constitution and laws.
considerable inequality can exist even in countries which grant equal rights to all citizens. These inequalities are often the result of differences in the resources and opportunities which are available to citizens in the social and economic spheres. For this reason a demand is often made for equal opportunities, or for ‘a level playing field’. But we should remember that although political and legal equality by itself may not be sufficient to build a just and egalitarian society, it is certainly an important component of it.
Political equality or equality before the law is an important first step in the pursuit of equality but it often needs to be supplemented by equality of opportunities. While the former is necessary to remove any legal hurdles which might exclude people from a voice in government and deny them access to available social goods, the pursuit of equality requires that people belonging to different groups and communities also have a fair and equal chance to compete for those goods and opportunities. For this, it is necessary to minimise the effects of social and economic inequalities and guarantee certain minimum conditions of life to all the members of the society —
adequate health care, the opportunity for good education, adequate nourishment and a minimum wage, among other things. In the absence of such facilities it is exceedingly difficult for all the members of the society to compete on equal terms. Where equality of opportunity does not exist a huge pool of potential talent tends to be wasted in society. In India, a special problem regarding equal opportunities comes not just from lack of facilities but from some of the customs which may prevail in different parts of country, or among different groups. Women, for instance, may not enjoy equal rights of inheritance in
some groups, or there may be social prohibitions regarding their taking part in certain kinds of activities, or they may even be discouraged from obtaining higher education. The state has a significant role in such matters. It should make policies to prevent discrimination or harassment of women in public places or employment, to provide incentives to open up education or certain professions to women, and other such
But social groups and individuals also have a role to play in raising awareness and supporting those who want to exercise their rights. INEQUALITIES IN EDUCATION Are the differences in the educational attainment of different communities depicted in the table below
Could these differences have taken place just by chance? Or do these differences point to the working of the caste system? Which factor other than the caste system do you see at work here? FEMINISM Feminism is a political doctrine of equal rights for women and men. Feminists are those men and women who believe that many of the inequalities we see in society between men and women are neither natural nor necessary and can be altered so that both women and men can lead free and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality between men and women in society is the result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and cultural system that values men more than women and gives men power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that men and women are different by nature and that this difference justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become pregnant and bear children does not require that only women should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us that much of the inequality between men and women is produced by society and not by nature. Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters while men are responsible for work in the “public” domain. Feminists question this distinction by pointing out that in fact most women are also active in the “public” domain. That is, most women all over the world are employed in some form of work outside the home, but women continue to be solely responsible for housework as well. However, despite this “double burden” as feminists term it, women are given little or no say in decisions taken in the public domain. Feminists contend that this public/ private distinction and all forms of gender inequalities can and should be eliminated.
Many of the inequalities we see in society between men and women are neither natural nor necessary and can be altered so that both women and men can lead free and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality between men and women in society is the result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and cultural system that values men more than women and gives men power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that
men and women are different by nature and that this difference justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become pregnant and bear children does not require that only women should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us that much of the inequality between men and women is produced by society and not by nature.
Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters while men are responsible for work in the “public” domain. Feminists question this distinction by pointing out that in fact most women are also active in the “public” domain. That is, most women all over the world are employed in some form of work outside the home, but women continue to be solely responsible for housework as well. However, despite this “double
burden” as feminists term it, women are given little or no say in decisions taken in the public. SOCIALISM Socialism refers to a set of political ideas that emerged as a response to the inequalities present in, and reproduced by, the industrial capitalist economy. The main concern of Socialism is how to minimise existing inequality and distribute resources justly. Although advocates of socialism are not entirely opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. | opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. Unlike socialists, liberals do not believe that political, econo and social inequalities are necessarily linked. They maintain inequalities in each of these spheres should be tackled appropria Thus, democracy could help to provide political equality but it m be necessary to also devise different strategies to deal with so differences and economic inequalities. The problem for libera not inequality as such, but unjust and entrenched inequalities w prevent individuals from developing their capabilities. 3.4 H C W P E ? OW AN E ROMOTE QUALITY We have already noted some of the basic differences among socialists and the liberals on the most desirable way of achie | opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. | Specifically, we need to consider if the use of affirmative action is justified for purposes
of bringing about equality. This issue has raised a lot of controversy in recent years and we will discuss this issue in the following section. Establishing Formal Equality The first step towards bringing about equality is, of course, ending the formal system of inequality and privileges. Social, economic and political inequalities all over the world have been protected by customs and legal systems that prohibited some sections of society from enjoying certain kinds of opportunities and rewards. Poor people were not granted the right to vote in a large number of countries. Women were not allowed to take up many professions
The caste system in India prevented people from the ‘lower’ castes from doing anything except manual labour. In many countries only people from some families could occupy high positions. Attainment of equality requires that all such restrictions or privileges should be brought to an end. Since many of these systems have the sanction of law, equality requires that the government and the law of the land should stop protecting these systems of inequality. This is what our Constitution does. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or
Our Constitution also abolishes the practice of untouchability. Most modern constitutions and democratic governments have formally accepted the principle of equality and incorporated it as identical treatment by law to all citizens without any regard to their caste, race, religion or gender. Equality Through Differential Treatment However, as we noted earlier, formal equality or equality before law is necessary but not sufficient to realise the principle of equality. Sometimes it is necessary to treat people differently in order to ensure that they can enjoy equal rights.
people may have to be taken into account for this purpose. For instance, disabled people may justifiably demand special ramps in public spaces so that they get an equal chance to enter public buildings. Or women working in call centre night may need special protection during journey to and from the centre LET’S DO IT Make a list of all the equal opportunities and what kinds of policies facilities that students be pursued to overcome those hindrances
with various kinds of questions that are being discussed in almos physical handicaps societies today. Some countries have used poli would need to learn as of affirmative action to enhance equalit any other student. In our country we have relied on Which of these facilities policy of reservations.
Affirmative Action Affirmative action is based on the idea that it is not sufficient to establish formal equality by law. When we wish to eliminate inequalities that are deeply rooted, it is necessary to take some more positive measures to minimise and eliminate entrenched forms of social inequalities. Most policies of affirmative action are thus designed to correct the cumulative effect of past inequalities. Affirmative action can however take many forms, from preferential spending on facilities for disadvantaged communities,
such as, scholarships and hostels to special consideration for admissions to educational institutions and jobs. In our country we have adopted a policy of quotas or reserved seats in education and jobs to provide equality of opportunity to deprived groups, and this has been the subject of considerable debate and disagreement. The policy has been defended on the ground that certain groups have been victims of social prejudice and discrimination in the form of exclusion and segregation. These communities who have suffered in the past and been denied equal opportunities cannot be immediately expected to compete with others on equal terms.
Therefore, in the interest of creating an egalitarian and just society they need to be given special protection and help. Special assistance in the form of affirmative action is expected to be a temporary or time-bound measure. The assumption is that special consideration will enable these communities to overcome the existing disadvantages and then compete with others on equal terms. Although policies of affirmative action are supported for making the society more equal, many theorists argue against them. They question whether treating people differently can ever lead to greater equality. Critics of positive discrimination, particularly policies of
reservations, thus invoke the principle of equality to argue against such policies. They contend that any provision of reservations or quotas for the deprived in admissions for higher education or jobs is unfair as it arbitrarily denies other sections of society their right to equal treatment. They maintain that reservations are a form of reverse discrimination and they continue with the practices that the principle of equality questions and rejects. Ultimately the policies we choose would have to be justified in terms of their success
aking the society more egalitarian and fair to all. While reflecting on the issue of equality, a distinction must also made between treating everyone in an identical manner and ting everyone as equal. The latter may on occasions need rential treatment but in all such cases the primary consideration o promote equality. Differential or special treatment may be sidered to realise the goal of equality but it requires justification careful reflection. Since differential treatment for different munities was part and parcel of the caste system and practices apartheid, liberals are usually very wary of deviations from the
m of identical treatment. Many of these issues relating to the pursuit of equality have been raised by the women’s movement. In the nineteenth century women struggled for equal rights. They demanded, for instance, the right to vote, the right to receive degrees in colleges and universities and the right to work — that is, the same rights as the men in their society. However, as they entered the job market they realised that women required special facilities in order to exercise these rights.
instance, they required some provision for maternity leave and crèches in the workplace. Without special considerations of this kind, they could not seriously compete for jobs or enjoy a successful professional and personal life. They needed, in other words, sometimes to be treated differently if they are to enjoy the same rights as men. As we deliberate on issues of equality and examine whether different treatment is warranted in a particular case, we need continuously to ask ourselves whether differential treatment is essential to ensure that a set of people can enjoy the same rights as
the rest of society. Caution must, however, be exercised to see that differential treatment does not yield new structures of dominance and oppression, or become a means for some dominant groups to reassert special privileges and power in society. Differential treatment is intended and justified only as a means to promoting a just and egalitarian society.
Equality
This chapter is about the concept of equality, a value that is also enshrined in our
Constitution. In reflecting on this concept it examines the following questions:

What is equality? Why should we be concerned about this moral and political
ideal? Does the pursuit of equality involve treating everyone the same way in every
condition?
How may we pursue equality and minimise inequality in different spheres of life? How do we distinguish between different dimensions of equality — political, economic
and social? In the course of understanding and answering these questions, you would encounter
some important ideologies of our time — socialism, marxism, liberalism and feminism. As a political individual,
the concept of equality invokes the idea that
human beings have an equal worth regard
of their colour, gender, race, or nationality
maintains that human beings deserve equality
consideration and respect because of the
common humanity. It is this notion of a shame
humanity that lies behind, for instance,
notions of universal human rights or ‘crisis
against humanity’. In the modern period the equality of
human beings has been used as a rally
slogan in the struggles against states and so
do institutions which uphold inequalities of raw
wealth status or privilege, among people
in
the eighteenth century, the Free
revolutionaries used the slogan ‘Libe
Search for quotations
Equality and Fraternity’ to revolt against
from different religious
scriptures that affirm landed feudal aristocracy.
WHY DOES EQUALITY MATTER? country we can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing,
schools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms
along with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or
toilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences
between what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and
the table on inequalities within our country. FACT SHEET ON GLOBAL INEQUALITIES
1. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater
than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of
global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls
54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America
and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86
per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s
energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries
consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy,
thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper
as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but
1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of
the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen
oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of
pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed
countries.
We can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing,
chools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms
long with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or
oilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences
etween what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and
he table on inequalities within our country. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed countries. Source: Human Development Report, 2005, UNDP. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed

women or dalits who feel marginalised in our society.
is a widely accepted ideal which is embodied in the constitutions
and laws of many countries. ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES IN INDIA
Here are some findings from the Census of India held in 2011 about household amenities and assets. You don’t need to memorise any of these figures. Just read these to understand the extent of urban-rural disparities in the country. Where would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in the house 35% 71% Bathroom in the house 45% 87% Television 33% 77% Scooter/Moped/ Motorcycle 14% 35% Car/Jeep/ Van 2% 10% Thus we face a paradox : almost everyone acc the ideal of equality, yet almost everywhere encounter inequality. We live in a complex worl unequal wealth, opportunities, work situations, power. Should we be concerned about these kind inequalities? Are they a permanent and inevit feature of social life which reflects the difference Why talk about talent and ability of Why talk about
global or national
inequalities when all
around us there are
inequalities to which
nobody seems to
Just look at
the way my parents
favour my brother
over me. the concept of equality which we will consider here are : to promote
equality should we always treat all persons in exactly the same
way? How should a society decide which differences of treatment or
reward are acceptable and which are not? Also, what kind of policies
should we pursue to try and make the society more egalitarian?
3.2 WHAT IS EQUALITY? Take a look at these images. All of them make distinctions between human beings on grounds of
race and colour and these appear to most of us as unacceptable. In
fact, such distinctions violate our intuitive understanding of equality
which tells us that all human beings should be entitled to the same
respect and consideration because of their common humanity. However, treating people with equal respect need not mean always
treating them in an identical way. No society treats all its members
in exactly the same way under all conditions. The smooth functioning
of society requires division of work and functions and people often
enjoy different status and rewards on account of it. At times these
differences of treatment may appear acceptable or even necessary. For instance, we usually do not feel that giving prime ministers, or
army generals, a special official rank and status goes against the
notion of equality, provided their privileges are not misused. But
some other kinds of inequalities may seem unjust. For instance, if a
child born in a slum is denied nutritious food or good education
through no fault of his/her own, it may appear unfair to us.
The question that arises is which distinctions and differences are
acceptable and which are not? When people are treated differently
just because they are born in a particular religion or race or caste or
gender, we regard it as an unacceptable form of inequality. But
human beings may pursue different ambitions and goals and not
all may be equally successful. So long as they are able to develop the
best in themselves we would not feel that equality has been
undermined. Some may become good musicians while others may
not be equally outstanding, some become famous scientists while
others more noted for their hard work and conscientiousness.
commitment to the ideal of equality does not imply the elimination
of all forms of differences. It merely suggests that the treatment we
receive and the opportunities we enjoy must not be pre-determined
by birth or social circumstance. Equality of Opportunities
The concept of equality implies that all people, as human beings,
are entitled to the same rights and opportunities to develop their
skills and talents, and to pursue their goals and ambitions.
means that in a society people may differ with regard to their choices
and preferences. They may also have different talents and skills
which results in some being more successful in their chosen careers
than others. But just because only some become ace cricketers or
successful lawyers, it does not follow that the society should be
considered unequal. In other words, it is not the lack of equality of
status or wealth or privilege that is significant but the inequalities
in people’s access to such basic goods, as education, health care,
safe housing, that make for an unequal and unjust society. Natural and Social Inequalities
A distinction has sometimes been made in political theory between
natural inequalities and socially-produced inequalities. Natural
inequalities are those that emerge between people as a result of
their different capabilities and talents. Natural inequalities are considered to be the result of the different characteristics and abilities with which people are born. It is generally ssumed that natural differences cannot be altered. Social inequalities n the other hand are those created by society. Certain societies ay, for instance, value those who perform intellectual work over hose who do manual work and reward them differently. They may eat differently people of different race, or colour, or gender, or caste. ifferences of this kind reflect the values of a society and some of hese may certainly appear to us to be unjust. This distinction is sometimes useful in helping us to distinguish etween acceptable and unfair inequalities in society but it is not lways clear or self-evident. For instance, when certain inequalities n the treatment of people have existed over a long period of time hey may appear to us as justifiable because they are based on atural inequalities, that is, characteristics that people are born ith and cannot easily change. For example, women were for long escribed as ‘the weaker sex’, considered timid and of lesser ntelligence than men, needing special protection. Therefore, it was lt that denying women equal rights could be justified. Black people n Africa were considered by their colonial masters to be of lesser | | | |
are different from socially-produced inequalities which emerge as a
consequence of inequalities of opportunity or the exploitation of
some groups in a society by others. Another problem which arises with the idea of natural differences is
that some differences which could be considered natural need no longer
be seen as unalterable. For instance, advances in medical science and
technologies have helped many disabled people to function effectively
in society. Today, computers can help blind people, wheel chairs and
artificial limbs can help in cases of physical disability, even a person’s
looks can be changed with cosmetic surgery. The famous physicist
Stephen Hawking can hardly move or speak but he has made major
contributions to science. It would seem unjust to most people today if
disabled people are denied necessary help to overcome the effects of
their disability or a fair reward for their work on the grounds that they
are naturally less capable. Given all these complexities, it would be difficult to use the natural/
socially-produced distinction as a standard by which the laws and
policies of a society can be assessed. For this reason many theorists
today differentiate between inequality arising from our choices and
inequalities operating on account of the family or circumstance in
which a person is born. It is the latter that is a source of concern to
advocates of equality and which they wish to minimise and eliminate. 3.3 THREE DIMENSIONS OF EQUALITY
After considering what kind of social differences are unacceptable
we need to ask what are the different dimensions of equality that
we may pursue or seek to achieve in society. While identifying
different kinds of inequalities that exist in society, various thinkers
and ideologies have highlighted three main dimensions of equality
namely, political, social and economic. It is only by addressing
each of these three different dimensions of equality can we move
towards a more just and equal society. Political Equality
In democratic societies political equality would normally include
granting equal citizenship to all the members of the state.
distinctions made by society as a result of the differences of power
between people and nations rather than based on their inborn
characteristics. Equal citizenship brings with
it certain basic rights such as the right to vote, freedom of expression,
movement and association and freedom of belief. These are rights
which are considered necessary to enable citizens to develop
themselves and participate in the affairs of the state. But they are
legal rights, guaranteed by the constitution and laws.
considerable inequality can exist even in countries which grant equal
rights to all citizens. These inequalities are often the result of
differences in the resources and opportunities which are available to
citizens in the social and economic spheres. For this reason a demand
is often made for equal opportunities, or for ‘a level playing field’. But we should remember that although political and legal equality
by itself may not be sufficient to build a just and egalitarian society,
it is certainly an important component of it.
Political equality or equality before the law is an important first step
in the pursuit of equality but it often needs to be supplemented by
equality of opportunities. While the former is necessary to remove
any legal hurdles which might exclude people from a voice in
government and deny them access to available social goods, the
pursuit of equality requires that people belonging to different groups
and communities also have a fair and equal chance to compete for
those goods and opportunities. For this, it is necessary to minimise
the effects of social and economic inequalities and guarantee certain
minimum conditions of life to all the members of the society —
adequate health care, the opportunity for good education, adequate
nourishment and a minimum wage, among other things. In the
absence of such facilities it is exceedingly difficult for all the members
of the society to compete on equal terms. Where equality of
opportunity does not exist a huge pool of potential talent tends to
be wasted in society. In India, a special problem regarding equal opportunities comes
not just from lack of facilities but from some of the customs which
may prevail in different parts of country, or among different groups. Women, for instance, may not enjoy equal rights of inheritance in
some groups, or there may be social prohibitions regarding their
taking part in certain kinds of activities, or they may even be
discouraged from obtaining higher
education. The state has a significant
role in such matters. It should make
policies to prevent discrimination or
harassment of women in public places
or employment, to provide incentives
to open up education or certain
professions to women, and other such
But social groups and
individuals also have a role to play in
raising awareness and supporting
those who want to exercise their
rights. INEQUALITIES IN EDUCATION
Are the differences in the educational
attainment of different communities
depicted in the table below
Could these differences
have taken place just by chance? Or
do these differences point to the
working of the caste system? Which
factor other than the caste system do
you see at work here? FEMINISM
Feminism is a political doctrine of equal rights for women and men. Feminists are those men and women who believe that many of the inequalities we see in society between men and women are neither natural nor necessary and can be altered so that both women and men can lead free and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality between men and women in society is the result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and cultural system that values men more than women and gives men power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that men and women are different by nature and that this difference justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become pregnant and bear children does not require that only women should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us that much of the inequality between men and women is produced by society and not by nature. Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters while men are responsible for work in the “public” domain. Feminists question this distinction by pointing out that in fact most women are also active in the “public” domain. That is, most women all over the world are employed in some form of work outside the home, but women continue to be solely responsible for housework as well. However, despite this “double burden” as feminists term it, women are given little or no say in decisions taken in the public domain. Feminists contend that this public/ private distinction and all forms of gender inequalities can and should be eliminated.
Many of the inequalities we see in society
between men and women are neither
natural nor necessary and can be altered
so that both women and men can lead free
and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality
between men and women in society is the
result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and
cultural system that values men more than women and gives men
power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that
men and women are different by nature and that this difference
justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions
this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which
determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become
pregnant and bear children does not require that only women
should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us
that much of the inequality between men and women is produced
by society and not by nature.
Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are
supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters
while men are responsible for work in the
“public” domain. Feminists question this
distinction by pointing out that in fact most
women are also active in the “public” domain. That
is, most women all over the world are employed
in some form of work outside the home, but
women continue to be solely responsible for
housework as well. However, despite this “double
burden” as feminists term it, women are given
little or no say in decisions taken in the public. SOCIALISM
Socialism refers to a set of political ideas that emerged as a response to the inequalities present in, and reproduced by, the industrial capitalist economy. The main concern of Socialism is how to minimise existing inequality and distribute resources justly. Although advocates of socialism are not entirely opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. |
opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. Unlike socialists, liberals do not believe that political, econo and social inequalities are necessarily linked. They maintain inequalities in each of these spheres should be tackled appropria Thus, democracy could help to provide political equality but it m be necessary to also devise different strategies to deal with so differences and economic inequalities. The problem for libera not inequality as such, but unjust and entrenched inequalities w prevent individuals from developing their capabilities. 3.4 H C W P E ? OW AN E ROMOTE QUALITY We have already noted some of the basic differences among socialists and the liberals on the most desirable way of achie | opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. |

Specifically, we need
to consider if the use of affirmative action is justified for purposes
of bringing about equality. This issue has raised a lot of controversy
in recent years and we will discuss this issue in the following section. Establishing Formal Equality
The first step towards bringing about equality is, of course, ending
the formal system of inequality and privileges. Social, economic
and political inequalities all over the world have been protected by
customs and legal systems that prohibited some sections of society
from enjoying certain kinds of opportunities and rewards. Poor
people were not granted the right to vote in a large number of
countries. Women were not allowed to take up many professions
The caste system in India prevented people from
the ‘lower’ castes from doing anything except manual labour. In
many countries only people from some families could occupy
high positions. Attainment of equality requires that all such restrictions or
privileges should be brought to an end. Since many of these systems
have the sanction of law, equality requires that the government
and the law of the land should stop protecting these systems of
inequality. This is what our Constitution does. The Constitution
prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or
Our Constitution also abolishes the practice of
untouchability. Most modern constitutions and democratic
governments have formally accepted the principle of equality and
incorporated it as identical treatment by law to all citizens without
any regard to their caste, race, religion or gender. Equality Through Differential Treatment
However, as we noted earlier, formal equality or equality before law
is necessary but not sufficient to realise the principle of equality. Sometimes it is necessary to treat people differently in order to
ensure that they can enjoy equal rights.
people may have to be taken into account for this purpose. For
instance, disabled people may justifiably demand special ramps in
public spaces so that they get an equal chance to enter public
buildings. Or women working in call centre
night may need special protection during
journey to and from the centre

LET’S DO IT
Make a list of all the equal opportunities and what kinds of policies
facilities that students be pursued to overcome those hindrances
with various kinds of
questions that are being discussed in almos
physical handicaps
societies today. Some countries have used poli
would need to learn as
of affirmative action to enhance equalit
any other student. In our country we have relied on
Which of these facilities
policy of reservations.
Affirmative Action
Affirmative action is based on the idea that it is not sufficient to
establish formal equality by law. When we wish to eliminate
inequalities that are deeply rooted, it is necessary to take some
more positive measures to minimise and eliminate entrenched forms
of social inequalities. Most policies of affirmative action are thus
designed to correct the cumulative effect of past inequalities. Affirmative action can however take many forms, from
preferential spending on facilities for disadvantaged communities,
such as, scholarships and hostels to special consideration for
admissions to educational institutions and jobs. In our country we
have adopted a policy of quotas or reserved seats in education and
jobs to provide equality of opportunity to deprived groups, and this
has been the subject of considerable debate and disagreement. The
policy has been defended on the ground that certain groups have
been victims of social prejudice and discrimination in the form of
exclusion and segregation. These communities who have suffered
in the past and been denied equal opportunities cannot be
immediately expected to compete with others on equal terms.
Therefore, in the interest of creating an egalitarian and just society
they need to be given special protection and help. Special assistance in the form of affirmative action is expected to
be a temporary or time-bound measure. The assumption is that
special consideration will enable these communities to overcome the
existing disadvantages and then compete with others on equal terms. Although policies of affirmative action are supported for making the
society more equal, many theorists argue against them. They question
whether treating people differently can ever lead to greater equality. Critics of positive discrimination, particularly policies of
reservations, thus invoke the principle of equality to argue against
such policies. They contend that any provision of reservations or
quotas for the deprived in admissions for higher education or jobs is
unfair as it arbitrarily denies other sections of society their right to
equal treatment. They maintain that reservations are a form of reverse
discrimination and they continue with the practices that the principle
of equality questions and rejects. Ultimately the policies
we choose would have to be justified in terms of their success
aking the society more egalitarian and fair to all. While reflecting on the issue of equality, a distinction must also
made between treating everyone in an identical manner and
ting everyone as equal. The latter may on occasions need
rential treatment but in all such cases the primary consideration
o promote equality. Differential or special treatment may be
sidered to realise the goal of equality but it requires justification
careful reflection. Since differential treatment for different
munities was part and parcel of the caste system and practices
apartheid, liberals are usually very wary of deviations from the
m of identical treatment. Many of these issues relating to the pursuit of equality have been
raised by the women’s movement. In the nineteenth century women
struggled for equal rights. They demanded, for instance, the right to
vote, the right to receive degrees in colleges and universities and the
right to work — that is, the same rights as the men in their society. However, as they entered the job market they realised that women
required special facilities in order to exercise these rights.
instance, they required some provision for maternity leave and crèches
in the workplace. Without special considerations of this kind, they
could not seriously compete for jobs or enjoy a successful
professional and personal life. They needed, in other words,
sometimes to be treated differently if they are to enjoy the same rights
as men. As we deliberate on issues of equality and examine whether
different treatment is warranted in a particular case, we need
continuously to ask ourselves whether differential treatment is
essential to ensure that a set of people can enjoy the same rights as
the rest of society. Caution must, however, be exercised to see that
differential treatment does not yield new structures of dominance
and oppression, or become a means for some dominant groups to
reassert special privileges and power in society. Differential treatment
is intended and justified only as a means to promoting a just and
egalitarian society.
Equality
This chapter is about the concept of equality, a value that is also enshrined in our
Constitution. In reflecting on this concept it examines the following questions:

What is equality? Why should we be concerned about this moral and political
ideal? Does the pursuit of equality involve treating everyone the same way in every
condition?
How may we pursue equality and minimise inequality in different spheres of life? How do we distinguish between different dimensions of equality — political, economic
and social? In the course of understanding and answering these questions, you would encounter
some important ideologies of our time — socialism, marxism, liberalism and feminism. As a political individual,
the concept of equality invokes the idea that
human beings have an equal worth regard
of their colour, gender, race, or nationality
maintains that human beings deserve equality
consideration and respect because of the
common humanity. It is this notion of a shame
humanity that lies behind, for instance,
notions of universal human rights or ‘crisis
against humanity’. In the modern period the equality of
human beings has been used as a rally
slogan in the struggles against states and so
do institutions which uphold inequalities of raw
wealth status or privilege, among people
in
the eighteenth century, the Free
revolutionaries used the slogan ‘Libe
Search for quotations
Equality and Fraternity’ to revolt against
from different religious
scriptures that affirm landed feudal aristocracy.
WHY DOES EQUALITY MATTER? country we can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing,
schools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms
along with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or
toilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences
between what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and
the table on inequalities within our country. FACT SHEET ON GLOBAL INEQUALITIES
1. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater
than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of
global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls
54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America
and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86
per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s
energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries
consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy,
thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper
as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but
1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of
the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen
oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of
pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed
countries.
We can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing,
chools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms
long with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or
oilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences
etween what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and
he table on inequalities within our country. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed countries. Source: Human Development Report, 2005, UNDP. The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world’s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world’s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world’s population, owns 86 per cent of the world’s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world’s energy. On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed

women or dalits who feel marginalised in our society.
is a widely accepted ideal which is embodied in the constitutions
and laws of many countries. ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES IN INDIA
Here are some findings from the Census of India held in 2011 about household amenities and assets. You don’t need to memorise any of these figures. Just read these to understand the extent of urban-rural disparities in the country. Where would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in would your own family fit? û ü Families that have… Rural Urban Put or for families families your family Electricity connection 55% 93% Tap water in the house 35% 71% Bathroom in the house 45% 87% Television 33% 77% Scooter/Moped/ Motorcycle 14% 35% Car/Jeep/ Van 2% 10% Thus we face a paradox : almost everyone acc the ideal of equality, yet almost everywhere encounter inequality. We live in a complex worl unequal wealth, opportunities, work situations, power. Should we be concerned about these kind inequalities? Are they a permanent and inevit feature of social life which reflects the difference Why talk about talent and ability of Why talk about
global or national
inequalities when all
around us there are
inequalities to which
nobody seems to
Just look at
the way my parents
favour my brother
over me. the concept of equality which we will consider here are : to promote
equality should we always treat all persons in exactly the same
way? How should a society decide which differences of treatment or
reward are acceptable and which are not? Also, what kind of policies
should we pursue to try and make the society more egalitarian?
3.2 WHAT IS EQUALITY? Take a look at these images. All of them make distinctions between human beings on grounds of
race and colour and these appear to most of us as unacceptable. In
fact, such distinctions violate our intuitive understanding of equality
which tells us that all human beings should be entitled to the same
respect and consideration because of their common humanity. However, treating people with equal respect need not mean always
treating them in an identical way. No society treats all its members
in exactly the same way under all conditions. The smooth functioning
of society requires division of work and functions and people often
enjoy different status and rewards on account of it. At times these
differences of treatment may appear acceptable or even necessary. For instance, we usually do not feel that giving prime ministers, or
army generals, a special official rank and status goes against the
notion of equality, provided their privileges are not misused. But
some other kinds of inequalities may seem unjust. For instance, if a
child born in a slum is denied nutritious food or good education
through no fault of his/her own, it may appear unfair to us.
The question that arises is which distinctions and differences are
acceptable and which are not? When people are treated differently
just because they are born in a particular religion or race or caste or
gender, we regard it as an unacceptable form of inequality. But
human beings may pursue different ambitions and goals and not
all may be equally successful. So long as they are able to develop the
best in themselves we would not feel that equality has been
undermined. Some may become good musicians while others may
not be equally outstanding, some become famous scientists while
others more noted for their hard work and conscientiousness.
commitment to the ideal of equality does not imply the elimination
of all forms of differences. It merely suggests that the treatment we
receive and the opportunities we enjoy must not be pre-determined
by birth or social circumstance. Equality of Opportunities
The concept of equality implies that all people, as human beings,
are entitled to the same rights and opportunities to develop their
skills and talents, and to pursue their goals and ambitions.
means that in a society people may differ with regard to their choices
and preferences. They may also have different talents and skills
which results in some being more successful in their chosen careers
than others. But just because only some become ace cricketers or
successful lawyers, it does not follow that the society should be
considered unequal. In other words, it is not the lack of equality of
status or wealth or privilege that is significant but the inequalities
in people’s access to such basic goods, as education, health care,
safe housing, that make for an unequal and unjust society. Natural and Social Inequalities
A distinction has sometimes been made in political theory between
natural inequalities and socially-produced inequalities. Natural
inequalities are those that emerge between people as a result of
their different capabilities and talents. Natural inequalities are considered to be the result of the different characteristics and abilities with which people are born. It is generally ssumed that natural differences cannot be altered. Social inequalities n the other hand are those created by society. Certain societies ay, for instance, value those who perform intellectual work over hose who do manual work and reward them differently. They may eat differently people of different race, or colour, or gender, or caste. ifferences of this kind reflect the values of a society and some of hese may certainly appear to us to be unjust. This distinction is sometimes useful in helping us to distinguish etween acceptable and unfair inequalities in society but it is not lways clear or self-evident. For instance, when certain inequalities n the treatment of people have existed over a long period of time hey may appear to us as justifiable because they are based on atural inequalities, that is, characteristics that people are born ith and cannot easily change. For example, women were for long escribed as ‘the weaker sex’, considered timid and of lesser ntelligence than men, needing special protection. Therefore, it was lt that denying women equal rights could be justified. Black people n Africa were considered by their colonial masters to be of lesser | | | |
are different from socially-produced inequalities which emerge as a
consequence of inequalities of opportunity or the exploitation of
some groups in a society by others. Another problem which arises with the idea of natural differences is
that some differences which could be considered natural need no longer
be seen as unalterable. For instance, advances in medical science and
technologies have helped many disabled people to function effectively
in society. Today, computers can help blind people, wheel chairs and
artificial limbs can help in cases of physical disability, even a person’s
looks can be changed with cosmetic surgery. The famous physicist
Stephen Hawking can hardly move or speak but he has made major
contributions to science. It would seem unjust to most people today if
disabled people are denied necessary help to overcome the effects of
their disability or a fair reward for their work on the grounds that they
are naturally less capable. Given all these complexities, it would be difficult to use the natural/
socially-produced distinction as a standard by which the laws and
policies of a society can be assessed. For this reason many theorists
today differentiate between inequality arising from our choices and
inequalities operating on account of the family or circumstance in
which a person is born. It is the latter that is a source of concern to
advocates of equality and which they wish to minimise and eliminate. 3.3 THREE DIMENSIONS OF EQUALITY
After considering what kind of social differences are unacceptable
we need to ask what are the different dimensions of equality that
we may pursue or seek to achieve in society. While identifying
different kinds of inequalities that exist in society, various thinkers
and ideologies have highlighted three main dimensions of equality
namely, political, social and economic. It is only by addressing
each of these three different dimensions of equality can we move
towards a more just and equal society. Political Equality
In democratic societies political equality would normally include
granting equal citizenship to all the members of the state.
distinctions made by society as a result of the differences of power
between people and nations rather than based on their inborn
characteristics. Equal citizenship brings with
it certain basic rights such as the right to vote, freedom of expression,
movement and association and freedom of belief. These are rights
which are considered necessary to enable citizens to develop
themselves and participate in the affairs of the state. But they are
legal rights, guaranteed by the constitution and laws.
considerable inequality can exist even in countries which grant equal
rights to all citizens. These inequalities are often the result of
differences in the resources and opportunities which are available to
citizens in the social and economic spheres. For this reason a demand
is often made for equal opportunities, or for ‘a level playing field’. But we should remember that although political and legal equality
by itself may not be sufficient to build a just and egalitarian society,
it is certainly an important component of it.
Political equality or equality before the law is an important first step
in the pursuit of equality but it often needs to be supplemented by
equality of opportunities. While the former is necessary to remove
any legal hurdles which might exclude people from a voice in
government and deny them access to available social goods, the
pursuit of equality requires that people belonging to different groups
and communities also have a fair and equal chance to compete for
those goods and opportunities. For this, it is necessary to minimise
the effects of social and economic inequalities and guarantee certain
minimum conditions of life to all the members of the society —
adequate health care, the opportunity for good education, adequate
nourishment and a minimum wage, among other things. In the
absence of such facilities it is exceedingly difficult for all the members
of the society to compete on equal terms. Where equality of
opportunity does not exist a huge pool of potential talent tends to
be wasted in society. In India, a special problem regarding equal opportunities comes
not just from lack of facilities but from some of the customs which
may prevail in different parts of country, or among different groups. Women, for instance, may not enjoy equal rights of inheritance in
some groups, or there may be social prohibitions regarding their
taking part in certain kinds of activities, or they may even be
discouraged from obtaining higher
education. The state has a significant
role in such matters. It should make
policies to prevent discrimination or
harassment of women in public places
or employment, to provide incentives
to open up education or certain
professions to women, and other such
But social groups and
individuals also have a role to play in
raising awareness and supporting
those who want to exercise their
rights. INEQUALITIES IN EDUCATION
Are the differences in the educational
attainment of different communities
depicted in the table below
Could these differences
have taken place just by chance? Or
do these differences point to the
working of the caste system? Which
factor other than the caste system do
you see at work here? FEMINISM
Feminism is a political doctrine of equal rights for women and men. Feminists are those men and women who believe that many of the inequalities we see in society between men and women are neither natural nor necessary and can be altered so that both women and men can lead free and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality between men and women in society is the result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and cultural system that values men more than women and gives men power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that men and women are different by nature and that this difference justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become pregnant and bear children does not require that only women should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us that much of the inequality between men and women is produced by society and not by nature. Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters while men are responsible for work in the “public” domain. Feminists question this distinction by pointing out that in fact most women are also active in the “public” domain. That is, most women all over the world are employed in some form of work outside the home, but women continue to be solely responsible for housework as well. However, despite this “double burden” as feminists term it, women are given little or no say in decisions taken in the public domain. Feminists contend that this public/ private distinction and all forms of gender inequalities can and should be eliminated.
Many of the inequalities we see in society
between men and women are neither
natural nor necessary and can be altered
so that both women and men can lead free
and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality
between men and women in society is the
result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and
cultural system that values men more than women and gives men
power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that
men and women are different by nature and that this difference
justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions
this way of thinking by making a distinction between “sex” i.e. biological difference between men and women, and “gender” which
determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become
pregnant and bear children does not require that only women
should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us
that much of the inequality between men and women is produced
by society and not by nature.
Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are
supposed to be responsible for “private” and “domestic” matters
while men are responsible for work in the
“public” domain. Feminists question this
distinction by pointing out that in fact most
women are also active in the “public” domain. That
is, most women all over the world are employed
in some form of work outside the home, but
women continue to be solely responsible for
housework as well. However, despite this “double
burden” as feminists term it, women are given
little or no say in decisions taken in the public. SOCIALISM
Socialism refers to a set of political ideas that emerged as a response to the inequalities present in, and reproduced by, the industrial capitalist economy. The main concern of Socialism is how to minimise existing inequality and distribute resources justly. Although advocates of socialism are not entirely opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. |
opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. Unlike socialists, liberals do not believe that political, econo and social inequalities are necessarily linked. They maintain inequalities in each of these spheres should be tackled appropria Thus, democracy could help to provide political equality but it m be necessary to also devise different strategies to deal with so differences and economic inequalities. The problem for libera not inequality as such, but unjust and entrenched inequalities w prevent individuals from developing their capabilities. 3.4 H C W P E ? OW AN E ROMOTE QUALITY We have already noted some of the basic differences among socialists and the liberals on the most desirable way of achie | opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia’s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list : revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. |

Specifically, we need
to consider if the use of affirmative action is justified for purposes
of bringing about equality. This issue has raised a lot of controversy
in recent years and we will discuss this issue in the following section. Establishing Formal Equality
The first step towards bringing about equality is, of course, ending
the formal system of inequality and privileges. Social, economic
and political inequalities all over the world have been protected by
customs and legal systems that prohibited some sections of society
from enjoying certain kinds of opportunities and rewards. Poor
people were not granted the right to vote in a large number of
countries. Women were not allowed to take up many professions
The caste system in India prevented people from
the ‘lower’ castes from doing anything except manual labour. In
many countries only people from some families could occupy
high positions. Attainment of equality requires that all such restrictions or
privileges should be brought to an end. Since many of these systems
have the sanction of law, equality requires that the government
and the law of the land should stop protecting these systems of
inequality. This is what our Constitution does. The Constitution
prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or
Our Constitution also abolishes the practice of
untouchability. Most modern constitutions and democratic
governments have formally accepted the principle of equality and
incorporated it as identical treatment by law to all citizens without
any regard to their caste, race, religion or gender. Equality Through Differential Treatment
However, as we noted earlier, formal equality or equality before law
is necessary but not sufficient to realise the principle of equality. Sometimes it is necessary to treat people differently in order to
ensure that they can enjoy equal rights.
people may have to be taken into account for this purpose. For
instance, disabled people may justifiably demand special ramps in
public spaces so that they get an equal chance to enter public
buildings. Or women working in call centre
night may need special protection during
journey to and from the centre

LET’S DO IT
Make a list of all the equal opportunities and what kinds of policies
facilities that students be pursued to overcome those hindrances
with various kinds of
questions that are being discussed in almos
physical handicaps
societies today. Some countries have used poli
would need to learn as
of affirmative action to enhance equalit
any other student. In our country we have relied on
Which of these facilities
policy of reservations.
Affirmative Action
Affirmative action is based on the idea that it is not sufficient to
establish formal equality by law. When we wish to eliminate
inequalities that are deeply rooted, it is necessary to take some
more positive measures to minimise and eliminate entrenched forms
of social inequalities. Most policies of affirmative action are thus
designed to correct the cumulative effect of past inequalities. Affirmative action can however take many forms, from
preferential spending on facilities for disadvantaged communities,
such as, scholarships and hostels to special consideration for
admissions to educational institutions and jobs. In our country we
have adopted a policy of quotas or reserved seats in education and
jobs to provide equality of opportunity to deprived groups, and this
has been the subject of considerable debate and disagreement. The
policy has been defended on the ground that certain groups have
been victims of social prejudice and discrimination in the form of
exclusion and segregation. These communities who have suffered
in the past and been denied equal opportunities cannot be
immediately expected to compete with others on equal terms.
Therefore, in the interest of creating an egalitarian and just society
they need to be given special protection and help. Special assistance in the form of affirmative action is expected to
be a temporary or time-bound measure. The assumption is that
special consideration will enable these communities to overcome the
existing disadvantages and then compete with others on equal terms. Although policies of affirmative action are supported for making the
society more equal, many theorists argue against them. They question
whether treating people differently can ever lead to greater equality. Critics of positive discrimination, particularly policies of
reservations, thus invoke the principle of equality to argue against
such policies. They contend that any provision of reservations or
quotas for the deprived in admissions for higher education or jobs is
unfair as it arbitrarily denies other sections of society their right to
equal treatment. They maintain that reservations are a form of reverse
discrimination and they continue with the practices that the principle
of equality questions and rejects. Ultimately the policies
we choose would have to be justified in terms of their success
aking the society more egalitarian and fair to all. While reflecting on the issue of equality, a distinction must also
made between treating everyone in an identical manner and
ting everyone as equal. The latter may on occasions need
rential treatment but in all such cases the primary consideration
o promote equality. Differential or special treatment may be
sidered to realise the goal of equality but it requires justification
careful reflection. Since differential treatment for different
munities was part and parcel of the caste system and practices
apartheid, liberals are usually very wary of deviations from the
m of identical treatment. Many of these issues relating to the pursuit of equality have been
raised by the women’s movement. In the nineteenth century women
struggled for equal rights. They demanded, for instance, the right to
vote, the right to receive degrees in colleges and universities and the
right to work — that is, the same rights as the men in their society. However, as they entered the job market they realised that women
required special facilities in order to exercise these rights.
instance, they required some provision for maternity leave and crèches
in the workplace. Without special considerations of this kind, they
could not seriously compete for jobs or enjoy a successful
professional and personal life. They needed, in other words,
sometimes to be treated differently if they are to enjoy the same rights
as men. As we deliberate on issues of equality and examine whether
different treatment is warranted in a particular case, we need
continuously to ask ourselves whether differential treatment is
essential to ensure that a set of people can enjoy the same rights as
the rest of society. Caution must, however, be exercised to see that
differential treatment does not yield new structures of dominance
and oppression, or become a means for some dominant groups to
reassert special privileges and power in society. Differential treatment
is intended and justified only as a means to promoting a just and
egalitarian society.
