Equality It analyses certain basic questions such as how sho society be organised? Why do we need government? What is the form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens? Political theory examines questions of this kind systematically thinks about the values that inform political lif values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the mea and significance of these and other related concepts. It clarifies existing definitions of these concepts by focusing on some m
political thinkers of the past and present. It also examines the ex to which freedom or equality are actually present in the instituti that we participate in, everyday life such as schools, shops, bu or trains or government offices. At an advanced level, it look whether existing definitions are adequate and how exis institutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices m be modified to become more democratic. The objective of polit theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questi and assess the political events of our time. In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics
political theory and why we should study it. “ You would have noticed that people have different id about what politics is. Political Theory claims, manipulating different sections, pursuing personal or group interests ruthlessly and in worst cases stooping to crime, they link politics with ‘scams’. So prevalent is this way of thinking that when
we see people in different walks of life trying to promote their interests by any means possible, we say they are playing politics. If we see a cricketer manipulating to stay in the team, or a fellow student trying to use his father’s position, or a colleague in office mindlessly agreeing with the boss, we say he or she is playing ‘dirty’ politics. Disillusioned by such pursuits of selfishness we despair of politics. We say, “I am not interested in politics” or “I am going to stay away from politics”. It is not only ordinary people who despair of politics; even businessmen and
entrepreneurs routinely blame politics for their woes even as they benefit from and fund various political parties. Cinema stars also complain of politics though they seem to be adept at the game once they join it. We are thus confronted with conflicting images of politics. Is politics an undesirable activity that we should stay away from and get rid off? Or, is it a worthwhile activity which we must engage with in order to make a better world?
It is unfortunate that politics has come to be associated with the pursuit of self-interest by any and every method. We need to realise that politics is an important and integral part of any society. Mahatma Gandhi once observed that politics envelops us like the coils of a snake and there is no other way out but to wrestle with it. No society can exist without some form of political organisation and collective decision making. A society that wants to sustain itself needs to take into account the multiple needs and interests of its members. A number of social institutions such as the family, tribes and
economic institutions, have emerged to help people fulfil their needs and aspirations. Such institutions help us find ways of living together acknowledging our obligations to each other. Among such institutions, governments play an important part. How governments You must retire from politics at once Your activities are having a bad influence on him. He thinks he can get away with lying and cheating. Laxman in the Times of India
We see governments determine our economic policy and foreign policy educational policy. These policies can help to improve the live people but an inefficient or corrupt government can also enda people’s lives and security. If the government in power allows conflicts to become violent, markets close down and schools shut. These disrupt our lives; we cannot buy things that we need urgently; those who are sick cannot reach the hospital; e the school schedule gets affected, syllabi cannot be completed
we may have to take extra coaching for the exams and pay tui fees. If, on the other hand, the government makes policies to incr literacy and employment, we may get an opportunity to go good school and get a decent job. Since the actions of the government affect us deeply, we ta lively interest in what governments do. We form associations organise campaigns to articulate our demands. We negotiate others and try to shape the goals that governments pursue. W we disagree with the policies of the government, we protest organise demonstrations to persuade the government to cha
We passionately debate the actions of representatives and discuss whether corruption has increase decreased. We ask whether corruption can be rooted out; whe reservations for specific groups are just or not. We try to underst why some parties and leaders win elections. Political Theory are formed and how they function is thus an important focus of politics.
To sum up, politics arises from the fact that we have different visions of what is just and desirable for us and our Read the newspaper. What are the issues dominating the headlines? Do you think they have any relevance for you? Though Rousseau or Mar
Gandhi did not become politicians, their ideas influenced generation of politicians everywhere. There are also contemporary thinkers draw upon them to defend freedom or democracy in our own time. Besides examining arguments, political theorists also reflect our current political experiences and point out trends possibilities for the future. Can you identify the political principle/value which is in application in each of the following statements/situations? I should be able to decide which subjects I want to study in school.
The practice of untouchability has been abolished. All Indians are equal before law. Minorities can have their own schools and colleges. Foreigners who are visiting India cannot vote in Indian elections. There should be no censorship of media or films. Students should be consulted while planning the annual day functions. Everyone must join the Republic Day celebrations. But is all this relevant for us now? Have we not already achieved
While India is free and independent, questions regarding freedom and equality have not ceased to come up. This is because issues concerning freedom, equality, democracy arise in many areas of social life and they are being implemented different sectors at different paces. Some people may have a privileged place in society while others are deprived even of basic necessities. Some are able to achieve whatever goals they set for themselves while many are unable even to go to schools so that
they can have decent jobs in the future. For them, freedom is still a distant dream. Secondly, though freedom is guaranteed in our Constitution, we encounter new interpretations all the time. This is a bit like playing a game; as we play chess or cricket, we learn how to interpret the rules. In the process, we discover new and broader meanings of the game itself. Similarly, the fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution are continually being reinterpreted in response to new circumstances. For instance, the right to life has been interpreted by the Courts to include the right to livelihood.
right to information has been granted through a new law. Societies frequently encounter new challenges which generate new interpretations. The fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution have been amended and expanded over time through judicial interpretations and government policies which are designed to address new problems. Thirdly, as our world changes, we may discover new dimensions of freedom as well as new threats to freedom. For instance, global communications technology is making it easier for activists to network with one another
across the world for protecting tribal cultures or forests. But it also enables terrorists and criminals to network. Moreover, internet commerce is all set to increase in the future. This means that the information we give about ourselves online to buy goods or services must be protected. So even though netizens (citizens of the internet) do not like government control, they recognise that some form of regulation is necessary to safeguard individual security and privacy. As a result, questions are raised regarding how much freedom should be given
to people using the net. For instance, should they be allowed to send unsolicited e-mails to strangers? Can you advertise your products in Should governments be allowed to read private e-mails to track down terrorists? How much regulation is justified and who should regulate – governments or some private regulators? Political theory has a lot to teach us about possible answers to these questions and is therefore very relevant. 1.3 PUTTING POLITICAL THEORY TO PRACTICE In this textbook, we confine ourselves to one aspect of political theory
— that which deals with the origins, meaning and significance of political ideas that we are familiar with such as freedom, equality, citizenship, justice, development, nationalism, secularism and so on. When we begin a debate or argument on any topic, we usually ask “what does it mean?” and “how does it matter?” Political theorists have asked what is freedom or equality and provided diverse definitions. Unlike in mathematics where there can be one definition of a triangle or square, we encounter many definitions of equality or freedom or justice. In ancient Greece, in the city of Athens, Socrates was described as the ‘wisest
He was known for questioning and challenging popularly held beliefs about society, religion and politics. For this he was condemned to death by the rulers of Athens. His student Plato wrote extensively about the life and ideas of Socrates. In his book ‘The Republic’, he created the character Socrates and through him examined the question – what is justice? The book opens with a dialogue between Socrates and Cephalus. In the course of this dialogue Cephalus and his friends come to recognise that their understanding of justice is inadequate and unacceptable. The important thing in this is that Socrates uses reason to reveal the limitations
and inconsistencies in a given point of view. His adversaries eventually admit that the views they had held and lived by could not be sustained. This is because terms like equality concern our relationships with other human beings rather than with things. Human beings, unlike things, have opinions on issues like equality. And many opinions need to be understood and harmonised. How do we go about doing this? Let us begin with our common experience of equality in different places. You may have noticed that people often jump the queue in shops
or doctor’s waiting rooms or government offices. Sometimes, those who do so are told to get back in line and we feel glad. Sometimes, they get ahead and we feel cheated. We resent this because we all want equal opportunity to get goods and services for which we are paying. So when we reflect on our experience, we understand that equality means equal opportunity for all. At the same time, if there are separate counters for the old and disabled, we understand that such special treatment may be justified. But we also notice everyday that many poor people cannot go to the shop or to a doctor because they have no money to pay
Read and see how Socrates achieved this. Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it? —to speak the truth and to pay your debts —no more than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friend when in his right mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him? … You are quite right, he replied. But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not a correct definition of justice. … And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. for goods and services. Some of these people could be day labourers who are cutting stones or lugging bricks for long hours. If we are sensitive, we feel that it is not fair that in a society some members cannot even have their basic needs satisfied. We come to realise that equality must involve some kind of fairness so that people are not unduly exploited and disadvantaged by
Consider the fact that there are many children who cannot go to school because they have to work to feed themselves. And most girl students in poor households are pulled out of school to care for their younger siblings while parents go to work. Even though the Indian constitution guarantees the right to primary education for all, this right remains formal. Again, we may feel that the government should do more for such children and their parents so that they are enabled to go to school. Thus you may see that our idea of equality is quite complex;
when we are in a queue or playground we want equal opportunity. But ought the just to injure anyone at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue
And that human virtue is justice? If we suffer from some disability we want special provisions made. When we cannot even afford basic needs, equal opportunity is not enough. We must be enabled to go to school or get help through proactive measures such as fair distribution of resources (jobs,
decent wages, subsidised hospitals, etc.). This requires that some agency be made responsible to ensure fairness. So the reason we have many definitions is because the meaning of equality is dependent on the context. We started with what it meant for ourselves and then proceeded to consider others (the poor, disadvantaged, senior citizens, etc.). We discovered many layers of meaning. We have been doing political theory without realising it. Political theorists clarify the meaning of political concepts by looking at how they are understood and used in ordinary language. They also debate and examine the diverse meanings and opinions
in a systematic manner. When is equality of opportunity enough? When do people need special treatment? How far and how long should such special treatment be given? Should poor children be given midday meals to encourage them to stay in schools? These are some questions which they address. As you can see, these issues are eminently practical; they provide guidelines for framing public policies on education and employment. As in the case of equality, so also in the case of other concepts, political theorists engage with everyday opinions, debate possible meanings and thrash out policy options.
Development, Justice, Equality, Nationalism and Secularism are some of the concepts that we will discuss in the following chapters. 1.4 WHY SHOULD WE STUDY POLITICAL THEORY? We may have political ideas but do we need to study political theory? Is it not more suited for politicians who practise politics? Or for bureaucrats who make policies? Or for those who teach political theory? Or for lawyers and judges who interpret the Constitution and laws? Or for activists and journalists who expose exploitation
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease is best able to create one? And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march upon the enemy? Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?
That, I suppose, is to be inferred. Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it. That is implied in the argument. What do we (high school students) gain by knowing the meaning of freedom or equality? First of all, political theory is relevant for all the above target groups. As high school students, we may choose one of the above professions in the future and so indirectly it is relevant for us even now. Do we not learn mathematics although not all of us will become
Is it not because basic arithmetic is useful to life in general? Secondly, we are all going to be citizens entitled to vote and decide other issues. To act responsibly, it is helpful to have a basic knowledge of the political ideas and institutions that shape the world we live in. In the information society, it is crucial that we learn to be reasonable and informed if we are to participate in gram sabhas or offer our views on websites and polls. If we simply express arbitrary preferences, we will not be very effective. But if we are thoughtful and mature we can use the new media to discuss and
express our common interests. Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. … You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies? And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. But ought the just to injure any one at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.
When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? As citizens, we are a bit like the audience in a music concert; we are not the main performers interpreting the song and melody. But we set the agenda and appreciate the output and put in new
Have you noticed that musicians perform better when they know the audience is knowledgeable and appreciative? So also an educated and vigilant citizenry makes those who play politics more public-spirited. Thirdly, freedom, equality and secularism are not abstract issues in our lives. We daily encounter discrimination of various sorts in families, schools, colleges, shopping malls and so on. We ourselves have prejudices against people who are different from us, be they of a different caste or religion or gender or class. If we feel oppressed, we want it redressed and if that is delayed, we feel violent revolution
If we are privileged, we deny that there is any oppression even as our maids and servants struggle for dignity. Sometimes, we even feel that our servants deserve the treatment they get. What political theory encourages us to do is examine our ideas and feelings And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue of man? And that human virtue is justice? Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?
That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good by virtue make them bad?
Political Theory Political Theory about political things. Just by looking at them more carefully, we become moderate in our ideas and feelings. Finally, as students we enjoy debates and elocution competitions. We have opinions about what is right or wrong, just or unjust but do not know whether they are reasonable or not. Only when we argue with others, we realise the need to defend them and seek out reasons and arguments. Political theory exposes us to systematic thinking on justice or equality so that we can polish our opinions and argue in
an informed manner and for the sake of common interests. Such skills of debating rationally and communicating effectively are likely to be great assets in the global informational order. Nor can the good harm any one? And the just is the good? Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.
Equality It analyses certain basic questions such as how sho society be organised? Why do we need government? What is the form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens? Political theory examines questions of this kind systematically thinks about the values that inform political lif values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the mea and significance of these and other related concepts. It clarifies existing definitions of these concepts by focusing on some m
political thinkers of the past and present. It also examines the ex to which freedom or equality are actually present in the instituti that we participate in, everyday life such as schools, shops, bu or trains or government offices. At an advanced level, it look whether existing definitions are adequate and how exis institutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices m be modified to become more democratic. The objective of polit theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questi and assess the political events of our time. In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics
political theory and why we should study it. “ You would have noticed that people have different id about what politics is. Political Theory claims, manipulating different sections, pursuing personal or group interests ruthlessly and in worst cases stooping to crime, they link politics with ‘scams’. So prevalent is this way of thinking that when
we see people in different walks of life trying to promote their interests by any means possible, we say they are playing politics. If we see a cricketer manipulating to stay in the team, or a fellow student trying to use his father’s position, or a colleague in office mindlessly agreeing with the boss, we say he or she is playing ‘dirty’ politics. Disillusioned by such pursuits of selfishness we despair of politics. We say, “I am not interested in politics” or “I am going to stay away from politics”. It is not only ordinary people who despair of politics; even businessmen and
entrepreneurs routinely blame politics for their woes even as they benefit from and fund various political parties. Cinema stars also complain of politics though they seem to be adept at the game once they join it. We are thus confronted with conflicting images of politics. Is politics an undesirable activity that we should stay away from and get rid off? Or, is it a worthwhile activity which we must engage with in order to make a better world?
It is unfortunate that politics has come to be associated with the pursuit of self-interest by any and every method. We need to realise that politics is an important and integral part of any society. Mahatma Gandhi once observed that politics envelops us like the coils of a snake and there is no other way out but to wrestle with it. No society can exist without some form of political organisation and collective decision making. A society that wants to sustain itself needs to take into account the multiple needs and interests of its members. A number of social institutions such as the family, tribes and
economic institutions, have emerged to help people fulfil their needs and aspirations. Such institutions help us find ways of living together acknowledging our obligations to each other. Among such institutions, governments play an important part. How governments You must retire from politics at once Your activities are having a bad influence on him. He thinks he can get away with lying and cheating. Laxman in the Times of India
We see governments determine our economic policy and foreign policy educational policy. These policies can help to improve the live people but an inefficient or corrupt government can also enda people’s lives and security. If the government in power allows conflicts to become violent, markets close down and schools shut. These disrupt our lives; we cannot buy things that we need urgently; those who are sick cannot reach the hospital; e the school schedule gets affected, syllabi cannot be completed
we may have to take extra coaching for the exams and pay tui fees. If, on the other hand, the government makes policies to incr literacy and employment, we may get an opportunity to go good school and get a decent job. Since the actions of the government affect us deeply, we ta lively interest in what governments do. We form associations organise campaigns to articulate our demands. We negotiate others and try to shape the goals that governments pursue. W we disagree with the policies of the government, we protest organise demonstrations to persuade the government to cha
We passionately debate the actions of representatives and discuss whether corruption has increase decreased. We ask whether corruption can be rooted out; whe reservations for specific groups are just or not. We try to underst why some parties and leaders win elections. Political Theory are formed and how they function is thus an important focus of politics.
To sum up, politics arises from the fact that we have different visions of what is just and desirable for us and our Read the newspaper. What are the issues dominating the headlines? Do you think they have any relevance for you? Though Rousseau or Mar
Gandhi did not become politicians, their ideas influenced generation of politicians everywhere. There are also contemporary thinkers draw upon them to defend freedom or democracy in our own time. Besides examining arguments, political theorists also reflect our current political experiences and point out trends possibilities for the future. Can you identify the political principle/value which is in application in each of the following statements/situations? I should be able to decide which subjects I want to study in school.
The practice of untouchability has been abolished. All Indians are equal before law. Minorities can have their own schools and colleges. Foreigners who are visiting India cannot vote in Indian elections. There should be no censorship of media or films. Students should be consulted while planning the annual day functions. Everyone must join the Republic Day celebrations. But is all this relevant for us now? Have we not already achieved
While India is free and independent, questions regarding freedom and equality have not ceased to come up. This is because issues concerning freedom, equality, democracy arise in many areas of social life and they are being implemented different sectors at different paces. Some people may have a privileged place in society while others are deprived even of basic necessities. Some are able to achieve whatever goals they set for themselves while many are unable even to go to schools so that
they can have decent jobs in the future. For them, freedom is still a distant dream. Secondly, though freedom is guaranteed in our Constitution, we encounter new interpretations all the time. This is a bit like playing a game; as we play chess or cricket, we learn how to interpret the rules. In the process, we discover new and broader meanings of the game itself. Similarly, the fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution are continually being reinterpreted in response to new circumstances. For instance, the right to life has been interpreted by the Courts to include the right to livelihood.
right to information has been granted through a new law. Societies frequently encounter new challenges which generate new interpretations. The fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution have been amended and expanded over time through judicial interpretations and government policies which are designed to address new problems. Thirdly, as our world changes, we may discover new dimensions of freedom as well as new threats to freedom. For instance, global communications technology is making it easier for activists to network with one another
across the world for protecting tribal cultures or forests. But it also enables terrorists and criminals to network. Moreover, internet commerce is all set to increase in the future. This means that the information we give about ourselves online to buy goods or services must be protected. So even though netizens (citizens of the internet) do not like government control, they recognise that some form of regulation is necessary to safeguard individual security and privacy. As a result, questions are raised regarding how much freedom should be given
to people using the net. For instance, should they be allowed to send unsolicited e-mails to strangers? Can you advertise your products in Should governments be allowed to read private e-mails to track down terrorists? How much regulation is justified and who should regulate – governments or some private regulators? Political theory has a lot to teach us about possible answers to these questions and is therefore very relevant. 1.3 PUTTING POLITICAL THEORY TO PRACTICE In this textbook, we confine ourselves to one aspect of political theory
— that which deals with the origins, meaning and significance of political ideas that we are familiar with such as freedom, equality, citizenship, justice, development, nationalism, secularism and so on. When we begin a debate or argument on any topic, we usually ask “what does it mean?” and “how does it matter?” Political theorists have asked what is freedom or equality and provided diverse definitions. Unlike in mathematics where there can be one definition of a triangle or square, we encounter many definitions of equality or freedom or justice. In ancient Greece, in the city of Athens, Socrates was described as the ‘wisest
He was known for questioning and challenging popularly held beliefs about society, religion and politics. For this he was condemned to death by the rulers of Athens. His student Plato wrote extensively about the life and ideas of Socrates. In his book ‘The Republic’, he created the character Socrates and through him examined the question – what is justice? The book opens with a dialogue between Socrates and Cephalus. In the course of this dialogue Cephalus and his friends come to recognise that their understanding of justice is inadequate and unacceptable. The important thing in this is that Socrates uses reason to reveal the limitations
and inconsistencies in a given point of view. His adversaries eventually admit that the views they had held and lived by could not be sustained. This is because terms like equality concern our relationships with other human beings rather than with things. Human beings, unlike things, have opinions on issues like equality. And many opinions need to be understood and harmonised. How do we go about doing this? Let us begin with our common experience of equality in different places. You may have noticed that people often jump the queue in shops
or doctor’s waiting rooms or government offices. Sometimes, those who do so are told to get back in line and we feel glad. Sometimes, they get ahead and we feel cheated. We resent this because we all want equal opportunity to get goods and services for which we are paying. So when we reflect on our experience, we understand that equality means equal opportunity for all. At the same time, if there are separate counters for the old and disabled, we understand that such special treatment may be justified. But we also notice everyday that many poor people cannot go to the shop or to a doctor because they have no money to pay
Read and see how Socrates achieved this. Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it? —to speak the truth and to pay your debts —no more than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friend when in his right mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him? … You are quite right, he replied. But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not a correct definition of justice. … And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. for goods and services. Some of these people could be day labourers who are cutting stones or lugging bricks for long hours. If we are sensitive, we feel that it is not fair that in a society some members cannot even have their basic needs satisfied. We come to realise that equality must involve some kind of fairness so that people are not unduly exploited and disadvantaged by
Consider the fact that there are many children who cannot go to school because they have to work to feed themselves. And most girl students in poor households are pulled out of school to care for their younger siblings while parents go to work. Even though the Indian constitution guarantees the right to primary education for all, this right remains formal. Again, we may feel that the government should do more for such children and their parents so that they are enabled to go to school. Thus you may see that our idea of equality is quite complex;
when we are in a queue or playground we want equal opportunity. But ought the just to injure anyone at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue
And that human virtue is justice? If we suffer from some disability we want special provisions made. When we cannot even afford basic needs, equal opportunity is not enough. We must be enabled to go to school or get help through proactive measures such as fair distribution of resources (jobs,
decent wages, subsidised hospitals, etc.). This requires that some agency be made responsible to ensure fairness. So the reason we have many definitions is because the meaning of equality is dependent on the context. We started with what it meant for ourselves and then proceeded to consider others (the poor, disadvantaged, senior citizens, etc.). We discovered many layers of meaning. We have been doing political theory without realising it. Political theorists clarify the meaning of political concepts by looking at how they are understood and used in ordinary language. They also debate and examine the diverse meanings and opinions
in a systematic manner. When is equality of opportunity enough? When do people need special treatment? How far and how long should such special treatment be given? Should poor children be given midday meals to encourage them to stay in schools? These are some questions which they address. As you can see, these issues are eminently practical; they provide guidelines for framing public policies on education and employment. As in the case of equality, so also in the case of other concepts, political theorists engage with everyday opinions, debate possible meanings and thrash out policy options.
Development, Justice, Equality, Nationalism and Secularism are some of the concepts that we will discuss in the following chapters. 1.4 WHY SHOULD WE STUDY POLITICAL THEORY? We may have political ideas but do we need to study political theory? Is it not more suited for politicians who practise politics? Or for bureaucrats who make policies? Or for those who teach political theory? Or for lawyers and judges who interpret the Constitution and laws? Or for activists and journalists who expose exploitation
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease is best able to create one? And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march upon the enemy? Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?
That, I suppose, is to be inferred. Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it. That is implied in the argument. What do we (high school students) gain by knowing the meaning of freedom or equality? First of all, political theory is relevant for all the above target groups. As high school students, we may choose one of the above professions in the future and so indirectly it is relevant for us even now. Do we not learn mathematics although not all of us will become
Is it not because basic arithmetic is useful to life in general? Secondly, we are all going to be citizens entitled to vote and decide other issues. To act responsibly, it is helpful to have a basic knowledge of the political ideas and institutions that shape the world we live in. In the information society, it is crucial that we learn to be reasonable and informed if we are to participate in gram sabhas or offer our views on websites and polls. If we simply express arbitrary preferences, we will not be very effective. But if we are thoughtful and mature we can use the new media to discuss and
express our common interests. Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. … You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies? And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. But ought the just to injure any one at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.
When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? As citizens, we are a bit like the audience in a music concert; we are not the main performers interpreting the song and melody. But we set the agenda and appreciate the output and put in new
Have you noticed that musicians perform better when they know the audience is knowledgeable and appreciative? So also an educated and vigilant citizenry makes those who play politics more public-spirited. Thirdly, freedom, equality and secularism are not abstract issues in our lives. We daily encounter discrimination of various sorts in families, schools, colleges, shopping malls and so on. We ourselves have prejudices against people who are different from us, be they of a different caste or religion or gender or class. If we feel oppressed, we want it redressed and if that is delayed, we feel violent revolution
If we are privileged, we deny that there is any oppression even as our maids and servants struggle for dignity. Sometimes, we even feel that our servants deserve the treatment they get. What political theory encourages us to do is examine our ideas and feelings And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue of man? And that human virtue is justice? Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?
That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good by virtue make them bad?
Political Theory Political Theory about political things. Just by looking at them more carefully, we become moderate in our ideas and feelings. Finally, as students we enjoy debates and elocution competitions. We have opinions about what is right or wrong, just or unjust but do not know whether they are reasonable or not. Only when we argue with others, we realise the need to defend them and seek out reasons and arguments. Political theory exposes us to systematic thinking on justice or equality so that we can polish our opinions and argue in
an informed manner and for the sake of common interests. Such skills of debating rationally and communicating effectively are likely to be great assets in the global informational order. Nor can the good harm any one? And the just is the good? Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.
Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts, and that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil the debt which he owes to his enemies, —to say this is not wise; for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown, the injuring of another can be in no case just. I agree with you, said Polemarchus.
Equality
It analyses certain basic questions such as how sho
society be organised? Why do we need government? What is the
form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does
state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens? Political theory examines questions of this kind
systematically thinks about the values that inform political lif
values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the mea
and significance of these and other related concepts. It clarifies
existing definitions of these concepts by focusing on some m
political thinkers of the past and present. It also examines the ex
to which freedom or equality are actually present in the instituti
that we participate in, everyday life such as schools, shops, bu
or trains or government offices. At an advanced level, it look
whether existing definitions are adequate and how exis
institutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices m
be modified to become more democratic. The objective of polit
theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questi
and assess the political events of our time. In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics
political theory and why we should study it. “
You would have noticed that people have different id
about what politics is. Political Theory
claims, manipulating different sections, pursuing personal or group
interests ruthlessly and in worst cases stooping to crime, they link
politics with ‘scams’. So prevalent is this way of thinking that when
we see people in different walks of life trying to promote their interests
by any means possible, we say they are playing politics. If we see
a cricketer manipulating to stay in the team, or a fellow student
trying to use his father’s position, or a colleague in office mindlessly
agreeing with the boss, we say he or she is playing ‘dirty’ politics. Disillusioned by such pursuits of selfishness we
despair of politics. We say, “I am not interested
in politics” or “I am going to stay away from
politics”. It is not only ordinary people who
despair of politics; even businessmen and
entrepreneurs routinely blame politics for their
woes even as they benefit from and fund various
political parties. Cinema stars also complain of
politics though they seem to be adept at the game
once they join it. We are thus confronted with conflicting
images of politics. Is politics an undesirable
activity that we should stay away from and get
rid off? Or, is it a worthwhile activity which we
must engage with in order to make a better world?
It is unfortunate that politics has come to be
associated with the pursuit of self-interest by
any and every method. We need to realise that
politics is an important and integral part of any society. Mahatma
Gandhi once observed that politics envelops us like the coils of a
snake and there is no other way out but to wrestle with it. No society
can exist without some form of political organisation and collective
decision making. A society that wants to sustain itself needs to
take into account the multiple needs and interests of its members. A number of social institutions such as the family, tribes and
economic institutions, have emerged to help people fulfil their needs
and aspirations. Such institutions help us find ways of living together
acknowledging our obligations to each other. Among such
institutions, governments play an important part. How governments
You must retire from politics at
once! Your activities are having a
bad influence on him. He thinks
he can get away with lying and
cheating. Laxman in the Times of India
We see
governments determine our economic policy and foreign policy
educational policy. These policies can help to improve the live
people but an inefficient or corrupt government can also enda
people’s lives and security. If the government in power allows
conflicts to become violent, markets close down and schools
shut. These disrupt our lives; we cannot buy things that we
need urgently; those who are sick cannot reach the hospital; e
the school schedule gets affected, syllabi cannot be completed
we may have to take extra coaching for the exams and pay tui
fees. If, on the other hand, the government makes policies to incr
literacy and employment, we may get an opportunity to go
good school and get a decent job. Since the actions of the government affect us deeply, we ta
lively interest in what governments do. We form associations
organise campaigns to articulate our demands. We negotiate
others and try to shape the goals that governments pursue. W
we disagree with the policies of the government, we protest
organise demonstrations to persuade the government to cha
We passionately debate the actions of
representatives and discuss whether corruption has increase
decreased. We ask whether corruption can be rooted out; whe
reservations for specific groups are just or not. We try to underst
why some parties and leaders win
elections. Political Theory are formed and how they function is thus an
important focus of politics.
To sum up, politics arises from the
fact that we have different visions of what
is just and desirable for us and our
Read the newspaper. What are
the issues dominating the
headlines? Do you think they
have any relevance for you? Though Rousseau or Mar
Gandhi did not become politicians, their ideas influenced generation
of politicians everywhere. There are also contemporary thinkers
draw upon them to defend freedom or democracy in our own time. Besides examining arguments, political theorists also reflect
our current political experiences and point out trends
possibilities for the future. Can you identify the political principle/value which is in
application in each of the following statements/situations? I should be able to decide which subjects I want to study in
school.
The practice of untouchability has been abolished. All Indians are equal before law. Minorities can have their own schools and colleges. Foreigners who are visiting India cannot vote in Indian
elections. There should be no censorship of media or films. Students should be consulted while planning the annual day
functions. Everyone must join the Republic Day celebrations. But is all this relevant for us now? Have we not already achieved
While India is free and independent,
questions regarding freedom and equality have not ceased to come
up. This is because issues concerning freedom, equality, democracy
arise in many areas of social life and they are being implemented
different sectors at different paces. Some people may
have a privileged place in society while others are deprived even of
basic necessities. Some are able to achieve whatever goals they set
for themselves while many are unable even to go to schools so that
they can have decent jobs in the future. For them, freedom is still a
distant dream. Secondly, though freedom is guaranteed in our Constitution,
we encounter new interpretations all the time. This is a bit like
playing a game; as we play chess or cricket, we learn how to interpret
the rules. In the process, we discover new and broader meanings of
the game itself. Similarly, the fundamental rights guaranteed by
our Constitution are continually being reinterpreted in response to
new circumstances. For instance, the right to life has been
interpreted by the Courts to include the right to livelihood.
right to information has been granted through a new law. Societies
frequently encounter new challenges which generate new
interpretations. The fundamental rights guaranteed by our
Constitution have been amended and expanded over time through
judicial interpretations and government policies which are designed
to address new problems. Thirdly, as our world changes, we may discover new
dimensions of freedom as well as new threats to freedom. For instance, global communications technology is
making it easier for activists to network with one another
across the world for protecting tribal cultures or forests. But it also enables terrorists and criminals to network. Moreover, internet commerce is all set to increase in
the future. This means that the information we give
about ourselves online to buy goods or services must
be protected. So even though netizens (citizens of the
internet) do not like government control, they recognise
that some form of regulation is necessary to safeguard
individual security and privacy. As a result, questions
are raised regarding how much freedom should be given
to people using the net. For instance, should they be allowed to send
unsolicited e-mails to strangers? Can you advertise your products in

Should governments be allowed to read private e-mails
to track down terrorists? How much regulation is justified and who
should regulate – governments or some private regulators? Political
theory has a lot to teach us about possible answers to these questions
and is therefore very relevant. 1.3 PUTTING POLITICAL THEORY TO PRACTICE
In this textbook, we confine ourselves to one aspect of political theory
— that which deals with the origins, meaning and significance of
political ideas that we are familiar with such as freedom, equality,
citizenship, justice, development, nationalism, secularism and so
on. When we begin a debate or argument on any topic, we usually
ask “what does it mean?” and “how does it matter?” Political theorists
have asked what is freedom or equality and provided diverse
definitions. Unlike in mathematics where there can be one definition
of a triangle or square, we encounter many definitions of equality
or freedom or justice. In ancient Greece, in the city of Athens, Socrates was described as the ‘wisest
He was known for questioning and challenging popularly held beliefs about
society, religion and politics. For this he was condemned to death by the rulers of
Athens. His student Plato wrote extensively about the life and ideas of Socrates. In his
book ‘The Republic’, he created the character Socrates and through him examined
the question – what is justice? The book opens with a dialogue between Socrates and Cephalus. In the course of
this dialogue Cephalus and his friends come to recognise that their understanding
of justice is inadequate and unacceptable. The important thing in this is that Socrates uses reason to reveal the limitations
and inconsistencies in a given point of view. His adversaries eventually admit
that the views they had held and lived by could not be sustained. This is because terms like equality concern our relationships
with other human beings rather than with things. Human beings,
unlike things, have opinions on issues like equality. And many
opinions need to be understood and harmonised. How do we go
about doing this? Let us begin with our common experience of
equality in different places. You may have noticed that people often jump the queue in shops
or doctor’s waiting rooms or government offices. Sometimes, those
who do so are told to get back in line and we feel glad. Sometimes,
they get ahead and we feel cheated. We resent this because we all
want equal opportunity to get goods and services for which we are
paying. So when we reflect on our experience, we understand that
equality means equal opportunity for all. At the same time, if there
are separate counters for the old and disabled, we understand that
such special treatment may be justified. But we also notice everyday that many poor people cannot
go to the shop or to a doctor because they have no money to pay
Read and see how Socrates achieved this. Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it? —to speak the
truth and to pay your debts —no more than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friend when in his right
mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right
mind, ought I to give them back to him? …
You are quite right, he replied. But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not a correct definition
of justice. …
And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our
friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. for goods and services. Some of these people could be day
labourers who are cutting stones or lugging bricks for long hours. If we are sensitive, we feel that it is not fair that in a society
some members cannot even have their basic needs satisfied. We
come to realise that equality must involve some kind of fairness
so that people are not unduly exploited and disadvantaged by
Consider the fact that there are many children who cannot go
to school because they have to work to feed themselves. And most
girl students in poor households are pulled out of school to care for
their younger siblings while parents go to work. Even though the
Indian constitution guarantees the right to primary education for
all, this right remains formal. Again, we may feel that the government
should do more for such children and their parents so that they are
enabled to go to school. Thus you may see that our idea of equality is quite complex;
when we are in a queue or playground we want equal opportunity. But ought the just to injure anyone at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue
And that human virtue is justice? If we suffer from some disability we want special provisions made. When we cannot even afford basic needs, equal opportunity is not
enough. We must be enabled to go to school or get help through
proactive measures such as fair distribution of resources (jobs,
decent wages, subsidised hospitals, etc.). This requires that some
agency be made responsible to ensure fairness. So the reason we have many definitions is because the meaning
of equality is dependent on the context. We started with what it
meant for ourselves and then proceeded to consider others (the poor,
disadvantaged, senior citizens, etc.). We discovered many layers of
meaning. We have been doing political theory without realising it. Political theorists clarify the meaning of political concepts by
looking at how they are understood and used in ordinary language. They also debate and examine the diverse meanings and opinions
in a systematic manner. When is equality of opportunity enough? When do people need special treatment? How far and how long
should such special treatment be given? Should poor children be
given midday meals to encourage them to stay in schools? These
are some questions which they address. As you can see, these issues
are eminently practical; they provide guidelines for framing public
policies on education and employment. As in the case of equality, so also in the case of other concepts,
political theorists engage with everyday opinions, debate possible
meanings and thrash out policy options.
Development, Justice, Equality, Nationalism and Secularism are some
of the concepts that we will discuss in the following chapters. 1.4
WHY SHOULD WE STUDY POLITICAL THEORY? We may have political ideas but do we need to study political theory? Is it not more suited for politicians who practise politics? Or for
bureaucrats who make policies? Or for those who teach political
theory? Or for lawyers and judges who interpret the Constitution
and laws? Or for activists and journalists who expose exploitation
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the
opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease is best able to
create one? And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march upon the
enemy? Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?
That, I suppose, is to be inferred. Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it. That is implied in the argument. What do we (high school students) gain by
knowing the meaning of freedom or equality? First of all, political theory is relevant for all the above target
groups. As high school students, we may choose one of the above
professions in the future and so indirectly it is relevant for us even
now. Do we not learn mathematics although not all of us will become
Is it not because basic arithmetic is
useful to life in general? Secondly, we are all going to be citizens entitled to vote and
decide other issues. To act responsibly, it is helpful to have a basic
knowledge of the political ideas and institutions that shape the
world we live in. In the information society, it is crucial that we
learn to be reasonable and informed if we are to participate in gram
sabhas or offer our views on websites and polls. If we simply express
arbitrary preferences, we will not be very effective. But if we are
thoughtful and mature we can use the new media to discuss and
express our common interests. Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. …
You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies? And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our
friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. But ought the just to injure any one at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.
When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? As citizens, we are a bit like the audience in a music concert;
we are not the main performers interpreting the song and melody. But we set the agenda and appreciate the output and put in new
Have you noticed that musicians perform better when
they know the audience is knowledgeable and appreciative? So
also an educated and vigilant citizenry makes those who play politics
more public-spirited. Thirdly, freedom, equality and secularism are not abstract issues
in our lives. We daily encounter discrimination of various sorts in
families, schools, colleges, shopping malls and so on. We ourselves
have prejudices against people who are different from us, be they
of a different caste or religion or gender or class. If we feel oppressed,
we want it redressed and if that is delayed, we feel violent revolution
If we are privileged, we deny that there is any oppression
even as our maids and servants struggle for dignity. Sometimes,
we even feel that our servants deserve the treatment they get. What
political theory encourages us to do is examine our ideas and feelings
And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper
virtue of man? And that human virtue is justice? Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?
That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good
by virtue make them bad?
Political Theory
Political Theory
about political things. Just by looking at them more carefully, we
become moderate in our ideas and feelings. Finally, as students we enjoy debates and elocution competitions. We have opinions about what is right or wrong, just or unjust but do
not know whether they are reasonable or not. Only when we argue
with others, we realise the need to defend them and seek out reasons
and arguments. Political theory exposes us to systematic thinking
on justice or equality so that we can polish our opinions and argue in
an informed manner and for the sake of common interests. Such
skills of debating rationally and communicating effectively are likely
to be great assets in the global informational order. Nor can the good harm any one? And the just is the good? Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of
the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.
Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts, and
that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil the debt
which he owes to his enemies, —to say this is not wise; for it is not true, if, as
has been clearly shown, the injuring of another can be in no case just. I agree with you, said Polemarchus.
Equality
It analyses certain basic questions such as how sho
society be organised? Why do we need government? What is the
form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does
state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens? Political theory examines questions of this kind
systematically thinks about the values that inform political lif
values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the mea
and significance of these and other related concepts. It clarifies
existing definitions of these concepts by focusing on some m
political thinkers of the past and present. It also examines the ex
to which freedom or equality are actually present in the instituti
that we participate in, everyday life such as schools, shops, bu
or trains or government offices. At an advanced level, it look
whether existing definitions are adequate and how exis
institutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices m
be modified to become more democratic. The objective of polit
theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questi
and assess the political events of our time. In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics
political theory and why we should study it. “
You would have noticed that people have different id
about what politics is. Political Theory
claims, manipulating different sections, pursuing personal or group
interests ruthlessly and in worst cases stooping to crime, they link
politics with ‘scams’. So prevalent is this way of thinking that when
we see people in different walks of life trying to promote their interests
by any means possible, we say they are playing politics. If we see
a cricketer manipulating to stay in the team, or a fellow student
trying to use his father’s position, or a colleague in office mindlessly
agreeing with the boss, we say he or she is playing ‘dirty’ politics. Disillusioned by such pursuits of selfishness we
despair of politics. We say, “I am not interested
in politics” or “I am going to stay away from
politics”. It is not only ordinary people who
despair of politics; even businessmen and
entrepreneurs routinely blame politics for their
woes even as they benefit from and fund various
political parties. Cinema stars also complain of
politics though they seem to be adept at the game
once they join it. We are thus confronted with conflicting
images of politics. Is politics an undesirable
activity that we should stay away from and get
rid off? Or, is it a worthwhile activity which we
must engage with in order to make a better world?
It is unfortunate that politics has come to be
associated with the pursuit of self-interest by
any and every method. We need to realise that
politics is an important and integral part of any society. Mahatma
Gandhi once observed that politics envelops us like the coils of a
snake and there is no other way out but to wrestle with it. No society
can exist without some form of political organisation and collective
decision making. A society that wants to sustain itself needs to
take into account the multiple needs and interests of its members. A number of social institutions such as the family, tribes and
economic institutions, have emerged to help people fulfil their needs
and aspirations. Such institutions help us find ways of living together
acknowledging our obligations to each other. Among such
institutions, governments play an important part. How governments
You must retire from politics at
once! Your activities are having a
bad influence on him. He thinks
he can get away with lying and
cheating. Laxman in the Times of India
We see
governments determine our economic policy and foreign policy
educational policy. These policies can help to improve the live
people but an inefficient or corrupt government can also enda
people’s lives and security. If the government in power allows
conflicts to become violent, markets close down and schools
shut. These disrupt our lives; we cannot buy things that we
need urgently; those who are sick cannot reach the hospital; e
the school schedule gets affected, syllabi cannot be completed
we may have to take extra coaching for the exams and pay tui
fees. If, on the other hand, the government makes policies to incr
literacy and employment, we may get an opportunity to go
good school and get a decent job. Since the actions of the government affect us deeply, we ta
lively interest in what governments do. We form associations
organise campaigns to articulate our demands. We negotiate
others and try to shape the goals that governments pursue. W
we disagree with the policies of the government, we protest
organise demonstrations to persuade the government to cha
We passionately debate the actions of
representatives and discuss whether corruption has increase
decreased. We ask whether corruption can be rooted out; whe
reservations for specific groups are just or not. We try to underst
why some parties and leaders win
elections. Political Theory are formed and how they function is thus an
important focus of politics.
To sum up, politics arises from the
fact that we have different visions of what
is just and desirable for us and our
Read the newspaper. What are
the issues dominating the
headlines? Do you think they
have any relevance for you? Though Rousseau or Mar
Gandhi did not become politicians, their ideas influenced generation
of politicians everywhere. There are also contemporary thinkers
draw upon them to defend freedom or democracy in our own time. Besides examining arguments, political theorists also reflect
our current political experiences and point out trends
possibilities for the future. Can you identify the political principle/value which is in
application in each of the following statements/situations? I should be able to decide which subjects I want to study in
school.
The practice of untouchability has been abolished. All Indians are equal before law. Minorities can have their own schools and colleges. Foreigners who are visiting India cannot vote in Indian
elections. There should be no censorship of media or films. Students should be consulted while planning the annual day
functions. Everyone must join the Republic Day celebrations. But is all this relevant for us now? Have we not already achieved
While India is free and independent,
questions regarding freedom and equality have not ceased to come
up. This is because issues concerning freedom, equality, democracy
arise in many areas of social life and they are being implemented
different sectors at different paces. Some people may
have a privileged place in society while others are deprived even of
basic necessities. Some are able to achieve whatever goals they set
for themselves while many are unable even to go to schools so that
they can have decent jobs in the future. For them, freedom is still a
distant dream. Secondly, though freedom is guaranteed in our Constitution,
we encounter new interpretations all the time. This is a bit like
playing a game; as we play chess or cricket, we learn how to interpret
the rules. In the process, we discover new and broader meanings of
the game itself. Similarly, the fundamental rights guaranteed by
our Constitution are continually being reinterpreted in response to
new circumstances. For instance, the right to life has been
interpreted by the Courts to include the right to livelihood.
right to information has been granted through a new law. Societies
frequently encounter new challenges which generate new
interpretations. The fundamental rights guaranteed by our
Constitution have been amended and expanded over time through
judicial interpretations and government policies which are designed
to address new problems. Thirdly, as our world changes, we may discover new
dimensions of freedom as well as new threats to freedom. For instance, global communications technology is
making it easier for activists to network with one another
across the world for protecting tribal cultures or forests. But it also enables terrorists and criminals to network. Moreover, internet commerce is all set to increase in
the future. This means that the information we give
about ourselves online to buy goods or services must
be protected. So even though netizens (citizens of the
internet) do not like government control, they recognise
that some form of regulation is necessary to safeguard
individual security and privacy. As a result, questions
are raised regarding how much freedom should be given
to people using the net. For instance, should they be allowed to send
unsolicited e-mails to strangers? Can you advertise your products in

Should governments be allowed to read private e-mails
to track down terrorists? How much regulation is justified and who
should regulate – governments or some private regulators? Political
theory has a lot to teach us about possible answers to these questions
and is therefore very relevant. 1.3 PUTTING POLITICAL THEORY TO PRACTICE
In this textbook, we confine ourselves to one aspect of political theory
— that which deals with the origins, meaning and significance of
political ideas that we are familiar with such as freedom, equality,
citizenship, justice, development, nationalism, secularism and so
on. When we begin a debate or argument on any topic, we usually
ask “what does it mean?” and “how does it matter?” Political theorists
have asked what is freedom or equality and provided diverse
definitions. Unlike in mathematics where there can be one definition
of a triangle or square, we encounter many definitions of equality
or freedom or justice. In ancient Greece, in the city of Athens, Socrates was described as the ‘wisest
He was known for questioning and challenging popularly held beliefs about
society, religion and politics. For this he was condemned to death by the rulers of
Athens. His student Plato wrote extensively about the life and ideas of Socrates. In his
book ‘The Republic’, he created the character Socrates and through him examined
the question – what is justice? The book opens with a dialogue between Socrates and Cephalus. In the course of
this dialogue Cephalus and his friends come to recognise that their understanding
of justice is inadequate and unacceptable. The important thing in this is that Socrates uses reason to reveal the limitations
and inconsistencies in a given point of view. His adversaries eventually admit
that the views they had held and lived by could not be sustained. This is because terms like equality concern our relationships
with other human beings rather than with things. Human beings,
unlike things, have opinions on issues like equality. And many
opinions need to be understood and harmonised. How do we go
about doing this? Let us begin with our common experience of
equality in different places. You may have noticed that people often jump the queue in shops
or doctor’s waiting rooms or government offices. Sometimes, those
who do so are told to get back in line and we feel glad. Sometimes,
they get ahead and we feel cheated. We resent this because we all
want equal opportunity to get goods and services for which we are
paying. So when we reflect on our experience, we understand that
equality means equal opportunity for all. At the same time, if there
are separate counters for the old and disabled, we understand that
such special treatment may be justified. But we also notice everyday that many poor people cannot
go to the shop or to a doctor because they have no money to pay
Read and see how Socrates achieved this. Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it? —to speak the
truth and to pay your debts —no more than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friend when in his right
mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right
mind, ought I to give them back to him? …
You are quite right, he replied. But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not a correct definition
of justice. …
And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our
friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. for goods and services. Some of these people could be day
labourers who are cutting stones or lugging bricks for long hours. If we are sensitive, we feel that it is not fair that in a society
some members cannot even have their basic needs satisfied. We
come to realise that equality must involve some kind of fairness
so that people are not unduly exploited and disadvantaged by
Consider the fact that there are many children who cannot go
to school because they have to work to feed themselves. And most
girl students in poor households are pulled out of school to care for
their younger siblings while parents go to work. Even though the
Indian constitution guarantees the right to primary education for
all, this right remains formal. Again, we may feel that the government
should do more for such children and their parents so that they are
enabled to go to school. Thus you may see that our idea of equality is quite complex;
when we are in a queue or playground we want equal opportunity. But ought the just to injure anyone at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue
And that human virtue is justice? If we suffer from some disability we want special provisions made. When we cannot even afford basic needs, equal opportunity is not
enough. We must be enabled to go to school or get help through
proactive measures such as fair distribution of resources (jobs,
decent wages, subsidised hospitals, etc.). This requires that some
agency be made responsible to ensure fairness. So the reason we have many definitions is because the meaning
of equality is dependent on the context. We started with what it
meant for ourselves and then proceeded to consider others (the poor,
disadvantaged, senior citizens, etc.). We discovered many layers of
meaning. We have been doing political theory without realising it. Political theorists clarify the meaning of political concepts by
looking at how they are understood and used in ordinary language. They also debate and examine the diverse meanings and opinions
in a systematic manner. When is equality of opportunity enough? When do people need special treatment? How far and how long
should such special treatment be given? Should poor children be
given midday meals to encourage them to stay in schools? These
are some questions which they address. As you can see, these issues
are eminently practical; they provide guidelines for framing public
policies on education and employment. As in the case of equality, so also in the case of other concepts,
political theorists engage with everyday opinions, debate possible
meanings and thrash out policy options.
Development, Justice, Equality, Nationalism and Secularism are some
of the concepts that we will discuss in the following chapters. 1.4
WHY SHOULD WE STUDY POLITICAL THEORY? We may have political ideas but do we need to study political theory? Is it not more suited for politicians who practise politics? Or for
bureaucrats who make policies? Or for those who teach political
theory? Or for lawyers and judges who interpret the Constitution
and laws? Or for activists and journalists who expose exploitation
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the
opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease is best able to
create one? And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march upon the
enemy? Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?
That, I suppose, is to be inferred. Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it. That is implied in the argument. What do we (high school students) gain by
knowing the meaning of freedom or equality? First of all, political theory is relevant for all the above target
groups. As high school students, we may choose one of the above
professions in the future and so indirectly it is relevant for us even
now. Do we not learn mathematics although not all of us will become
Is it not because basic arithmetic is
useful to life in general? Secondly, we are all going to be citizens entitled to vote and
decide other issues. To act responsibly, it is helpful to have a basic
knowledge of the political ideas and institutions that shape the
world we live in. In the information society, it is crucial that we
learn to be reasonable and informed if we are to participate in gram
sabhas or offer our views on websites and polls. If we simply express
arbitrary preferences, we will not be very effective. But if we are
thoughtful and mature we can use the new media to discuss and
express our common interests. Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. …
You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies? And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our
friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our
friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. But ought the just to injure any one at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.
When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? As citizens, we are a bit like the audience in a music concert;
we are not the main performers interpreting the song and melody. But we set the agenda and appreciate the output and put in new
Have you noticed that musicians perform better when
they know the audience is knowledgeable and appreciative? So
also an educated and vigilant citizenry makes those who play politics
more public-spirited. Thirdly, freedom, equality and secularism are not abstract issues
in our lives. We daily encounter discrimination of various sorts in
families, schools, colleges, shopping malls and so on. We ourselves
have prejudices against people who are different from us, be they
of a different caste or religion or gender or class. If we feel oppressed,
we want it redressed and if that is delayed, we feel violent revolution
If we are privileged, we deny that there is any oppression
even as our maids and servants struggle for dignity. Sometimes,
we even feel that our servants deserve the treatment they get. What
political theory encourages us to do is examine our ideas and feelings
And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper
virtue of man? And that human virtue is justice? Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?
That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good
by virtue make them bad?
Political Theory
Political Theory
about political things. Just by looking at them more carefully, we
become moderate in our ideas and feelings. Finally, as students we enjoy debates and elocution competitions. We have opinions about what is right or wrong, just or unjust but do
not know whether they are reasonable or not. Only when we argue
with others, we realise the need to defend them and seek out reasons
and arguments. Political theory exposes us to systematic thinking
on justice or equality so that we can polish our opinions and argue in
an informed manner and for the sake of common interests. Such
skills of debating rationally and communicating effectively are likely
to be great assets in the global informational order. Nor can the good harm any one? And the just is the good? Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of
the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.
Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts, and
that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil the debt
which he owes to his enemies, —to say this is not wise; for it is not true, if, as
has been clearly shown, the injuring of another can be in no case just. I agree with you, said Polemarchus.
